---
id: how-math-influences-legal-decisions 
title: How Math Influences Legal Decisions
date: 2023-11-05T18:12:58-04:00
author: k3jph
layout: post
permalink: /2023/11/05/how-math-influences-legal-decisions
featured_image: /assets/img/news/how-math-influences-legal-decisions.jpg
categories:
- Blog 
tags:
- statistics
- forensics
- criminal justice
- fingerprint analysis
- wrongful conviction
---

In the hushed silence of a courtroom, every word and piece of evidence carries
immense weight. Picture the scene: attorneys meticulously lay out [DNA
matches](https://theconversation.com/dna-is-often-used-in-solving-crimes-but-how-does-dna-profiling-actually-work-191937),
[eyewitness
accounts](https://innocenceproject.org/eyewitness-misidentification/), and other
critical evidence, each piece scrutinized and debated in the pursuit of truth.
In this setting, probability theory and statistics emerge as invaluable allies.
They transform from abstract mathematical concepts into practical tools that
guide the hands of justice, ensuring that decisions rest on a solid foundation
of logical reasoning and data analysis.

My experiences have provided me with a unique perspective on these matters. In
2011, [I was appointed to the Board of Appeals for Howard
County](/service/howard-county), where I examined the nuances and complexities
of cases ranging from conditional uses to appeals against decisions made by
county agencies. The board's responsibility to meticulously examine testimonies
and evidence underscored the vital role that precision and thorough analysis
play in the legal process. Ensuring justice is not just about having evidence
but also about interpreting it correctly, and mathematics provides us with the
tools to do just that.

In 1999, the [Sally Clark
case](https://forensicstats.org/blog/2018/02/16/misuse-statistics-courtroom-sally-clark-case/)
brought this issue to the fore. Sally Clark, a solicitor and mother, was
wrongfully convicted for the deaths of her two infant sons. The conviction
heavily relied on the testimony of [Sir Alan Roy
Meadow](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1179752/). This
pediatrician stated that the probability of two affluent siblings from an
affluent family dying of [sudden infant death
syndrome](https://www.childrenshospital.org/conditions/sudden-infant-death-syndrome-sids)
(SIDS) was 1 in 73 million. However, this calculation was grievously flawed. It
failed to account that the deaths were not independent events, and the actual
probability was closer to 1 in 200. Subsequent review and statistical analysis
led to Clark's exoneration in 2003, but the case underscored the potential for
tragic errors when statistical data is misinterpreted.

A similar miscarriage of justice occurred in 2003 with the case of [Lucia de
Berk](https://dutchreview.com/culture/lucia-de-berk-dutch-nurse-wrongfully-imprisoned-6-years/),
a Dutch nurse. De Berk was convicted of multiple murders based on a statistical
analysis of her frequent presence during patient deaths. The probability
calculation, which suggested an extreme unlikelihood of mere coincidence, was
later revealed to be fundamentally flawed. De Berk was exonerated in 2010 after
a re-examination of the evidence and statistics.

These cases serve as sobering reminders of the profound impact that statistical
analysis can have on individuals' lives. They underscore the necessity for
accurate, careful statistical work and highlight the potential consequences when
it is misunderstood or misapplied in a legal context.

Forensic evidence, including DNA and fingerprints, often plays a crucial role in
legal proceedings, providing seemingly concrete links between individuals and
crime scenes. However, applying probability theory is paramount to accurately
interpret this evidence.

DNA profiling examines specific regions in a DNA sequence, with samples being
compared to determine the likelihood of a match. The uniqueness of these
sequences in an individual allows for highly precise identification. In many
cases, such as the [infamous O.J. Simpson trial of
1995](https://famous-trials.com/simpson/1857-evidence), DNA evidence has been
pivotal. Here, despite a strong DNA match connecting Simpson to the crime scene,
the defense argued that contamination and mishandling of evidence affected the
reliability of the DNA analysis.

Similarly, [fingerprint analysis relies on probability to match prints found at
crime scenes to individuals](https://www.nist.gov/forensic-biometrics). By
comparing minutiae points—unique features in the ridge patterns of
fingerprints—analysts estimate the likelihood that the prints belong to the same
person. While fingerprints have been used for over a century in forensic
science, they are not infallible. Errors can arise from partial prints or
poor-quality samples, making statistical rigor crucial to prevent
misidentification.

[Bayes'
Theorem](https://www.khanacademy.org/math/ap-statistics/probability-ap/stats-conditional-probability/v/bayes-theorem-visualized),
a principle of probability theory, allows for the updating of the probability of
a hypothesis based on new evidence. [In a legal
context](https://jse.amstat.org/v22n1/satake.pdf), it can be applied to assess
the probability of guilt given new evidence. For instance, consider a case where
a suspect's DNA is a partial match to evidence from a crime scene. Bayes'
Theorem can be used to calculate the likelihood of the suspect's guilt,
considering the partial match and the rate of such matches in the general
population.

Understanding and accurately applying probabilistic reasoning in interpreting
forensic evidence is crucial for ensuring justice. These mathematical tools
provide a way to quantify uncertainty and make informed decisions based on
incomplete or ambiguous data.  While statistics and probability theory can be
powerful tools in the legal system, they are not without their pitfalls. Misuse
or misunderstanding statistical data can lead to controversial and sometimes
unjust decisions.

Several cases have highlighted the consequences of misinterpreting statistical
data. For instance, the Sally Clark case, previously mentioned, is a stark
example where misapplication of probability led to a wrongful conviction. In
this case, the failure to correctly apply conditional probabilities and consider
dependent events resulted in a tragic error. Certain statistical methodologies,
especially those involving conditional probabilities or large datasets, can be
particularly prone to misinterpretation. The misunderstanding often arises when
complexities of real-world data clash with the assumptions made in statistical
models.

One common error is the "[Prosecutor's
Fallacy](https://www.cebm.ox.ac.uk/news/views/the-prosecutors-fallacy)," where
the probability of observing certain evidence given a person's innocence is
confused with the probability of a person being innocent given the observed
evidence. For instance, in the case of [People v. Collins
(1968)](https://law.justia.com/cases/california/supreme-court/2d/68/319.html), a
couple was convicted of robbery based on a prosecutor's argument that the
likelihood of a coincidental match of their distinctive attributes—race, hair
color, etc.—was extremely low. However, this confused the probability of
randomly selecting a couple with those features with the likelihood of their
guilt. The fallacy lies in failing to consider how many such couples existed and
could have committed the crime.

These instances underscore the need for careful application and interpretation
of statistical data in legal contexts to avoid such fallacies and ensure fair
and accurate judgments.  Correctly interpreting and applying probability is
crucial in ensuring that justice is not only served but is rooted in a bedrock
of sound logical reasoning and empirical analysis.

Legal professionals and statisticians must engage in continuous dialogue and
collaboration to refine the interpretation of evidence. This synergy reflects
the detailed scrutiny and nuanced understanding I observed while serving on the
Board in Howard County. Continuous education and heightened awareness of
statistical methodologies among legal professionals are paramount to avoid
missteps and ensure the responsible application of these powerful tools.

We can envision a future where our legal system adeptly wields mathematical
tools, yielding fair, informed, and just outcomes. By fostering a culture of
learning and vigilance, we can ensure that statistical reasoning is an ally, not
an adversary, in pursuing justice.
