---
id: 3003
title: Service Philosophy
date: 2015-10-13T18:22:06-04:00
author: James Howard
layout: page
guid: service-philosophy
featured_image: /assets/img/service.jpg
credits: _Image by [Creative Sustainability / Flickr](https://www.flickr.com/photos/aalto-cs/9669249877)._

---

Throughout my academic and public service careers, I have been driven by the
intertwined principles of service and scholarship, recognizing the inherent
value and symbiotic relationship between the two. This perspective has shaped my
approach to education, research, and community engagement.

My journey in public administration began with volunteering for the [Columbia
Association's](http://www.columbiassociation.org) budget committee in 2004. This
hands-on experience allowed me to witness firsthand the impact of budget
decisions on the organization. Intrigued by the complexities of public finance,
I pursued a Master of Public Administration (MPA) at the University of
Baltimore. This educational pursuit provided me with a solid foundation in
understanding the intricate relationship between budgeting, policy, and program
implementation.

Eager to delve deeper into the field, I continued my academic journey by
pursuing a Ph.D. in Public Policy, focusing on various land use issues. This
research trajectory aligned seamlessly with my passion for examining the
implications of flood insurance and evaluating program effectiveness. By
exploring the intersections of policy, economics, and social welfare, I aimed to
contribute to evidence-based decision-making and the improvement of public
well-being.

While immersing myself in academia, I recognized the importance of community
service and actively sought opportunities to make meaningful contributions
beyond the confines of the classroom. Serving on the [Howard
County](http://cc.howardcountymd.gov/) Public Engagement in Land Use Planning
Task Force and later on the Howard County Board of Appeals allowed me to
contribute to the development of land use policies and decisions. These
experiences deepened my understanding of the challenges faced by communities and
reinforced the need for informed and inclusive decision-making processes.

In addition to my commitment to community service, I have dedicated myself to
supporting the profession and institutions that have nurtured my growth. As a
member of the Maryland Chapter Council of the American Society for Public
Administration, I played an active role in organizing our annual conference and
awards program. By fostering connections between public administrators and
professionals from diverse fields, I aimed to create opportunities for
collaboration and knowledge sharing.

As an adjunct faculty member, I have strived to serve the institutions I have
been associated with. At the University of Maryland Global Campus, I actively
participated in the Learning Management System Selection Project, contributing
my insights to shape the educational technology landscape. Leveraging my status
as an alumnus of the University of Maryland, College Park, I collaborated with
university leaders to establish the [College Park Scholars Alumni
Association](http://alumni.umd.edu/s/1132/index.aspx?sid=1132&gid=1&pgid=1256),
fostering a vibrant community of scholars and practitioners.

Recognizing the importance of engaging with the wider public, I have sought
avenues to share my expertise and insights beyond academic circles. Writing
articles for _The Conversation_, I have addressed pressing issues such as the
[unsustainability of the National Flood Insurance
Program](https://theconversation.com/texas-floods-highlight-need-to-reform-key-insurance-program-42235)
and the [debates surrounding the Export-Import Bank of the United
States](https://theconversation.com/why-congress-should-keep-the-imperiled-export-import-bank-42234).
Through Ignite series talks, I have debunked misconceptions and shed light on
complex challenges, ranging from the Defense Department's infamous $435 hammer
to Maryland's stormwater management problem.

As an educator, I firmly believe that our responsibility extends beyond the
boundaries of the classroom. Effective communication of our work to the public
is paramount in ensuring its impact and relevance. By engaging with the public
and fostering understanding, we empower individuals to make informed decisions
and shape policies that reflect the latest research findings. Embracing this
service philosophy, I am committed to bridging the gap between academia and the
broader community, leveraging my expertise to contribute to a more informed and
equitable society.

## Maryland Defense Force

As a captain in the [Maryland Defense Force](/service/maryland-defense-force),
I've had the opportunity to lead and coordinate teams during various emergency
response scenarios. The role has enabled me to work alongside professionals from
multiple disciplines, enhancing the state's overall emergency readiness. This
service not only allows me to give back to my community but also enriches my own
understanding of crisis management and public policy.

## Howard County, Maryland

Serving on [Howard County](/service/howard-county)'s Board of Appeals and
Charter Review Commission has been both an honor and a civic duty. These roles
allowed me to influence local zoning and planning, as well as contribute to the
legal frameworks guiding county operations. The experience has enhanced my
academic work, offering practical insights into governance.

## Long Reach Community Association

In my role with the Long Reach Community Association, I was actively involved in
creating the [Long Reach Village Center Master
Plan](/service/long-reach-community-association). This wasn't just an academic
exercise; it was a collaborative effort aimed at building a sustainable and
inclusive community. The plan has since become a guiding blueprint for
development in the area.

## Columbia Association

My years-long volunteer involvement with the [Columbia
Association](/service/columbia-association)'s budget and financial advisory
committees has been about more than just service. It involved scrutinizing
budgets, making resource allocation recommendations, and aligning financial
plans with the organization's mission. This hands-on experience complemented my
academic background, bridging theory and real-world application.

