---
id: the-other-nobility
layout: post
title: The Other Nobility
date: 2025-09-05
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/09/05/the-other-nobility
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/the-other-nobility.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - nobility
  - British history
  - feudalism
  - social structures
  - historical institutions
---

> "The Thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me in borrowed robes?"  
> -- _Macbeth_, Act I, Scene 3

We remember
[Macbeth](https://www.folger.edu/explore/shakespeares-works/macbeth/read/) for
his ambition, his downfall, and his uninvited dinner guests, but his title is
the engine of the whole plot. He does not inherit the kingdom. He is given a
title. It is the bestowal of the thaneship of Cawdor that stokes his
expectations for something greater.

But what is a thane, really?

The thane sits in a category of nobility that no longer exists in practice but
lingers in form, an office of real local power, independent or nearly so, before
the administrative consolidation of kings and peers. These titles, thane,
moramer, gerefa, jarl, ealdorman, held land, rendered justice, led men. Some
served kings; some _were_ kings before the lines were drawn. They came from
tribal, regional, and pre-feudal systems. The Normans found them, named them
again, and in many cases, buried them.

These are the _other_ noble offices, not peerages, not princely fictions, but
working parts of social systems. And in some cases, they never fully went away.

## Systems of Honor and Office

It helps to see nobility not as a single ladder but as a spectrum of systems:

-   Companionage: personal, honorific, often non-hereditary, and tied to orders
-   Knightage: a system of service and reward, based in military or civil merit
-   Baronetage: a hybrid form, hereditary, but not peerage
-   Peerage: titled, inheritable, and recognized in formal law

Each of these forms a different mode of organizing status, responsibility, and
reward. Companionage tends to reward proximity and service. Knightage emphasizes
action and merit. Baronetage is a peculiar legal fiction, sold as a means of
raising funds but never granted seats in the House of Lords. Peerage, meanwhile,
remains the formal structure of titled aristocracy within the law of the realm.

Yet outside this framework sits the baronage, not the peerage barons, but the
older, more functionally grounded titles that structured local authority.

## The Baronage: Scotland, England, and Ireland

Scottish feudal baronies represent one of the most enduring and idiosyncratic
survivals of medieval governance. Unlike peerage barons, Scottish barons were
historically associated with specific parcels of land and bore real
jurisdictional authority within their territories. They held baronial courts,
could exercise the right of pit and gallows (summary justice including capital
punishment), and served as local administrators of the Crown's justice. These
baronies were fully heritable, and unlike peerage titles, they passed through
sale or grant rather than necessarily remaining with a noble lineage. Following
the 2000 Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc. (Scotland) Act, their judicial and
feudal powers were extinguished, but the titles themselves were preserved in
Scots property law as "[incorporeal
hereditaments](https://justapedia.org/wiki/Barons_in_Scotland)." Today, they can
still be transferred, inherited, and recognized, though they confer no legal
privilege beyond the title itself.

In England, the equivalent structure evolved into the manorial system, where the
Lord of the Manor held sway over a defined tract of land and its inhabitants.
These lords presided over courts leet and courts baron, administered local
customary law, managed the obligations of tenants, and often served as the
primary legal authority in rural areas. Unlike Scottish barons, English manorial
lords were rarely viewed as nobility per se, but their influence in local
governance was no less significant. Over centuries, many of these lordships
became detached from the land and today can be bought and sold as incorporeal
hereditaments under English property law. Despite the erosion of their practical
powers, some lords of the manor continue to maintain symbolic or ceremonial
roles in their communities.

Ireland maintained a distinct but parallel development. After the [Anglo-Norman
invasion](https://www.english-heritage.org.uk/learn/histories/1066-and-the-norman-conquest/),
Irish landholding incorporated elements of both Gaelic and Norman custom.
Manorial rights in Ireland were similar to those in England but layered over
older clan-based land structures. Some manorial jurisdictions were confirmed by
royal charter, while others operated more informally. The sweeping changes
brought by the Irish Land Acts of the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries extinguished most of these rights in practice. However, isolated legal
vestiges may still exist in title deeds and ceremonial claims, though they carry
no enforceable jurisdiction.

Taken together, these forms of baronage operated at the meso level: between
kings and commoners, empowered by custom, charter, or local recognition. They
represent a model of authority that was distributed, practical, and locally
embedded. In contrast to the peerage, which conferred honor and access to royal
favor, the baronage was often concerned with the mundane work of governance,
holding court, managing tenants, and enforcing law within a bounded territory.
It is a mode of nobility rooted in responsibility more than prestige, and one
whose quiet endurance still shapes the landscape of British legal history.

We might ask: why did England produce thousands of manorial lords, while
Scotland retained fewer, more consolidated barons. Part of the answer lies in
systems thinking. England's post-Conquest manorial system fractured land into
thousands of small jurisdictions, each with its own courts, customs, tenurial
obligations, and communal expectations. The result was an extraordinary
latticework of local authority. The [Domesday
Book](https://www.domesdaybook.co.uk/), compiled in 1086, offers more than just
a census of ownership, it provides a map of nested, overlapping, and deeply
local systems of power. In this model, lords of the manor functioned less like
courtiers and more like semi-autonomous managers of rural administration, tax
collection, and justice.

Scotland developed differently. Its geography, harsher, more mountainous, and
less densely settled, favored larger tracts of land under fewer hands. But just
as important was its social fabric. The Scottish crown, particularly before the
centralization under [David I](https://poms.ac.uk/record/person/130/), relied on
personal ties, kinship networks, and the delegated authority of powerful
regional magnates. These magnates, often in the form of mormaers or early
barons, had sweeping jurisdiction over wide territories. Scottish feudalism,
when it arrived, layered over these existing systems rather than replacing them.
The result was a baronage that was more consolidated, and often more durable.

Ireland reflects yet another path. Gaelic systems of land tenure and clan-based
authority resisted full integration into Anglo-Norman models. After the invasion
of 1169, some manorial structures were imposed, particularly in the
[Pale](https://www.britannica.com/place/The-Pale) and along the eastern coast,
but much of the country remained governed by brehon law and tribal chiefs well
into the early modern period. Even where Irish baronies were created under
English rule, they rarely produced the same density of localized legal
structures as in England. Manorialism was less a replacement than a colonial
overlay, and its long-term institutional footprint is correspondingly thinner.

Continental Europe offers further contrast. In France and the Holy Roman Empire,
the baronage was often subordinated to a stratified and deeply ceremonial
nobility. Local jurisdictions existed, of course, seigneuries, castellanies, and
petty lordships, but these were increasingly absorbed into larger ducal,
princely, or ecclesiastical dominions. In parts of Germany and Italy, imperial
immediacy created small sovereign entities, but these often functioned more like
microstates than manorial systems.  Taken together, the English model of
widespread, granular baronial authority is unusually intense. It reflects a
deliberate choice, or perhaps a cascade of choices, to distribute power downward
into the soil. Other systems retained nobility, but often as spectacle. England
made it a spreadsheet.

## Pre-Conquest Mechanics of Rule

Some of these titles reflect earlier, more tribal political structures, before
the neat categories of peerage and gentry, before kings consolidated power
through writ and seal. These were offices rooted in local power and reciprocal
obligation, not just ceremonial dignity.

### Ealdormen and Jarls

In Anglo-Saxon England, the _ealdorman_ was not merely a courtier but a key
agent of royal authority. Appointed by the king and typically drawn from
powerful noble families, the ealdorman functioned as both military commander and
regional governor. He presided over the shire court (_scīrgemōt_), led the local
fyrd (militia), and oversaw the administration of justice and taxation within
his assigned territory. These were not merely honorific roles, they were the
machinery through which the early English kingdom projected control beyond the
royal household.

The position of ealdorman persisted throughout the early and middle Anglo-Saxon
periods, but its institutional form gradually shifted. With the increasing
influence of Scandinavian settlement and governance in the Danelaw, the Norse
title _jarl_ began to emerge as a functional analogue in the north. While the
two titles never fully merged, they denoted similar ranks in different political
languages: both were provincial commanders with judicial and military authority.

Following the Norman Conquest in 1066, both _ealdorman_ and _jarl_ were swept
aside by the Normanized title _earl_, a term derived from the Old English but
recast to align with continental feudal norms. The responsibilities remained
broadly consistent, earls still held large territories, mustered forces, and
presided over justice, but the institutional context changed. Earldoms were now
held as feudal grants, dependent on royal favor and codified in writs and
tenures. What had once been an office embedded in custom and regional legitimacy
became a rank within a rigid feudal hierarchy. The title shifted, but the state
had changed around it. Same office, different frame, and a different kind of
king above it.

### The Thanage

The _thane_ (or _thegn_) was another such title, shared across Anglo-Saxon and
Scottish societies, but with notable regional differences in function and
development. In early medieval England, a thegn was a man who held land directly
from the king or a powerful lord, often in recognition of military service,
administrative competence, or personal loyalty. Positioned above the _ceorl_ (a
free commoner) and below the _ealdorman_ or bishop, thegns formed a crucial
layer of the governing elite. Their responsibilities could include managing
estates, collecting dues, serving in the royal household, and mustering troops
when called. While some thegns were minor landholders, others acquired
considerable wealth and influence, with some families eventually rising into the
ranks of the earldom.

The title of thegn, however, was more than a social distinction; it reflected a
relationship of obligation and service rooted in early Germanic and tribal
traditions. It was not strictly hereditary, nor purely feudal, but embedded in a
system of mutual recognition and reward.

In Scotland, the _thane_ took on a more explicitly territorial character. Rather
than simply being a royal retainer, the Scottish thane often held a defined area
of land, sometimes encompassing several townships, and functioned as a local
administrator of the Crown’s interests. The role included collecting royal
revenues, enforcing law, and commanding local levies. Unlike their English
counterparts, Scottish thanes were frequently integrated into a proto-feudal
hierarchy earlier, especially during the reforms of David I in the 12th century,
which imported Anglo-Norman legal and administrative practices.

Over time, particularly with the rise of chartered feudalism and the spread of
written land grants, the office of thane evolved into the title of _laird_, a
term denoting landownership, minor jurisdiction, and local standing. The laird
was still often responsible for tenants and customary courts but increasingly
operated within a codified baronial system. In this way, the thane did not
vanish; he was translated, first into laird, then, in many cases, into baron
under the expanding scaffolding of Scottish feudalism. The social function
persisted, but the language, and legal framing, changed. What was once a bond of
service became a bundle of rights.

### Mormaers

Even more distinctive was the _mormaer_ (or _moramer_), a uniquely Scottish
title that predates the imposition of feudal norms and Anglo-Norman hierarchy.
The term, from Gaelic _mór_ (great) and _máer_ (steward or officer), denoted a
high-ranking provincial ruler, part warlord, part magistrate, part clan
chieftain. Mormaers governed large regional territories known as _mormaerdoms_,
often corresponding to what would later become Scottish earldoms. Their
authority derived not from written charter, but from kinship, custom, and
military strength.

In the early medieval period, particularly before the reign of David I
(1124–1153), the mormaers were not merely aristocrats but functionally
autonomous rulers within a decentralized kingdom. In places like Moray,
Strathearn, and Mearns, mormaers could resist the king outright or even rival
him. The title carried with it the command of local levies, judicial authority
within their province, and deep genealogical legitimacy rooted in regional
lineages. In this sense, the mormaer was a kind of sub-king, accountable more to
local tradition than to royal prerogative.

This autonomy, however, proved incompatible with the Crown’s evolving ambitions.
Beginning with David I’s reforms, often called the “Normanization” of Scotland,
the Scottish monarchy began systematically regularizing noble authority. Through
a combination of feudal land grants, ecclesiastical restructuring, and the
introduction of Anglo-Norman legal forms, mormaers were gradually assimilated
into the emerging aristocratic hierarchy. Their titles were translated,
sometimes literally, into _earls_, now styled in charters and addressed in Latin
as _comes_, in line with continental practice.

But this was no mere renaming. The transformation marked a fundamental shift in
political logic. The mormaership was an organically emergent office, born of
tribal cohesion and practical sovereignty; the earldom was a legal rank, defined
by royal writ and bound to the logic of tenure and vassalage. Where the mormaer
ruled by ancestral right, the earl held by royal grant. What had once been a
local axis of power was now reoriented toward the king.

And yet, traces of the mormaership persisted. Some early earldoms continued to
be associated with traditional regions and clans, and many of the families that
held mormaerdoms simply carried their power forward under a new title. The
conversion was administrative, not revolutionary. The mormaer did not disappear;
he was absorbed, redefined as a peer rather than a prince.

## The Afterlife of Titles

These transformations reveal more than a change in names; they mark the
evolution of power itself. Authority was not simply passed down, it was
repackaged. Offices rooted in kinship and custom were rendered legible to the
state, translated into titles, tenures, and legal instruments. What had once
been personal and tribal became juridical and territorial. A thane became a
laird; a mormaer became an earl; a lord of the manor became a freehold
titleholder. The functions persisted, often for generations, even as the
frameworks shifted.

Yet fragments of these older systems still remain.

In England, Lords of the Manor continue to exist. If severed properly under law,
the title may be bought or sold independent of the land. While the practical
authority of manorial lords has long since eroded, their titles remain
recognized in property law, as incorporeal hereditaments, and may even be
registered with the Land Registry.

In Scotland, feudal baronies survived into the twenty-first century. Though
stripped of their judicial and landholding powers by the [_Abolition of Feudal
Tenure etc. (Scotland) Act
2000_](https://www.legislation.gov.uk/asp/2000/5/contents), the titles
themselves persist as heritable dignities. Some are still traded under private
contract, maintained as symbolic inheritances of local identity and social
standing.

Beyond the British Isles, the pattern recurs. The German _Freiherr_, the Spanish
_hidalgo_, the Polish _szlachta_, and even the French
[vidame](/2025/03/30/the-history-of-the-vidames) once served as institutional
intermediaries between sovereign power and rural administration. These were not
ornamental roles. They were interface layers between the crown and the
countryside.

Today, we treat many of these titles as curiosities or heirlooms, but they once
formed the scaffolding of state power. Understanding them is not just a matter
of lineage or etiquette, it is a study in how governance localizes, how the
abstract becomes concrete, and how authority must always take form in human
relationships.
