---
id: the-charge-that-shattered-a-siege
layout: post
title: The Charge That Shattered a Siege
date: 2025-09-12
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/09/12/the-charge-that-shattered-a-siege
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/the-charge-that-shattered-a-siege.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - military history
  - Vienna
  - Poland
  - kinetic energy
  - three-point estimate
  - cavalry
---

When Sabaton sings "[when the winged hussars
arrived](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KPzCE4HmbGM)," they are not
exaggerating the drama. The image of armored riders, wings rattling in the wind,
thundering downhill to save Vienna, is pure heavy metal. But beyond the
spectacle, there was also physics at work. Cavalry charges are momentum
weaponized, and the hussars made momentum into legend.

On September 12, 1683, the [siege of
Vienna](https://www.britannica.com/event/Siege-of-Vienna-1683) broke under the
charge of the Polish–Lithuanian winged hussars. That date has always been
remembered as the day relief arrived. The Ottoman army, pressing deep into
central Europe, was scattered by perhaps the most famous cavalry charge in
history. The winged hussars have since become a symbol of salvation arriving at
the last possible moment.

The reason we are here is because Chase asked a deceptively simple question:
what was the net kinetic energy of the hussars when they swept into Vienna. It
sounds like something you would hear in a physics classroom, but it is also a
way to strip back the legend and see how much raw force was actually in motion.
To answer him, we have to start not with equations, but with horses.

## The weight of a hussar

The base of our calculation is mass. Early modern cavalry horses were not the
towering draft animals of Hollywood, but neither were they ponies.
Archaeological studies suggest many warhorses of the period fell in the 430–550
kilogram range. That is smaller than today's Shire horse but heavier than a
modern racing Thoroughbred. To this we add the rider. A Polish nobleman with a
full meal in him, plus boots and a lance, might have weighed around 75–85
kilograms.

Armor adds another layer. Hussar armor was not the heavy plate of the Middle
Ages. Surviving sets weigh around 14–16 kilograms, enough to protect the torso
without burdening the horse. Weapons, saber, pistols, sometimes a war hammer,
added a few more. Tack and saddle systems could add 9–10 kilograms. Add it all
together and each hussar was somewhere between 530 and 660 kilograms, horse and
rider moving as one.

## How fast did they charge?

Speed is just as important as mass, because kinetic energy scales with the
square of velocity. Too slow, and a cavalry charge has no shock. Too fast, and
formation cohesion breaks down before impact. Horses have three natural gaits
beyond the walk: trot, canter, and gallop. The gallop can reach 14 m/s in short
bursts, but sustained charges typically stayed lower. Historians suggest charges
built up from trot to canter to gallop in the last few hundred meters,
stabilizing around 8–10 m/s when they actually hit. That is about 30–36 km/h,
faster than a sprinting human, slower than a modern car, but terrifying when
multiplied by thousands.

### The hussars at Vienna

At Vienna, the Polish king John III Sobieski led perhaps 18,000 cavalry in the
climactic wave, but only about 3,000 were the famous winged hussars. They rode
at the point of the wedge. If we want to understand the iconic moment, it makes
sense to calculate for the 3,000 first and then scale up. This way we can
separate the energy of the elite hussars from the total wall of horseflesh
behind them.

## The formula

Now we can introduce the math:

[latex]E = \tfrac{1}{2} N m v^2[/latex]

where [latex]N[/latex] is the number of riders, [latex]m[/latex] is their
combined mass, and [latex]v[/latex] is velocity. Because we do not know exact
weights or exact speed, we turn to a technique called a [three-point
estimate](https://galorath.com/estimation/three-point-estimating/). Instead of
one number, we choose a low case, a most likely case, and a high case, then
compare.

### Low case

Take the lighter horse (430 kg), the lighter rider (75 kg), the lower end of
armor and tack. Call it 534 kilograms in motion. Give them the slower charge
speed, 8 m/s. Multiply by 3,000 hussars. That comes out to about 51 megajoules,
or 12 kilograms of TNT equivalent. Twelve kilograms is the sort of charge you
would use to demolish a bridge span.

### Most likely case

Shift the assumptions to the middle. A 500 kg horse, an 80 kg rider, 15 kg
armor, and 10 kg tack give us 612 kilograms. Speed them up slightly to 9 m/s.
For 3,000 hussars, the math yields about 74 megajoules, or 18 kilograms of TNT.
That is the energy of a medium bomb, but stretched across a line of lances and
armored hooves.

### High case

Now load the dice. Take the heavier horse, a 100 kg rider plus weapons, a full
10 kg of tack, and drive them at 10 m/s. Each hussar comes to 660 kilograms, and
with 3,000 of them, the result is 99 megajoules, nearly 24 kilograms of TNT.
That is the energy in a truck bomb, focused at the point of a cavalry wedge.

### Scaling up

These figures are only for the Polish hussars themselves. Sobieski's total wave
at Vienna was about six times larger, nearly 18,000 cavalry in all. Multiply the
energy estimates by six and you reach between 70 and 140 kilograms of TNT
equivalent, delivered not as a sudden explosion but as a wall of men and horses
crashing into an army. It was not kilotons, not even close. But it was enough to
shatter a siege.

### Why the square matters

The real lesson is in the [latex]v^2[/latex]. A 10 percent increase in speed
means a 21 percent increase in energy. That means cohesion, terrain, and
discipline mattered enormously. If the hussars had bogged down on the slope,
their energy would have fallen dramatically. If they held formation long enough
to hit at speed, they delivered a blow amplified by the square of their
velocity. That exponential factor is why cavalry charges were so feared for so
long.

### What energy means on the field

Numbers alone do not capture what this felt like to the Ottomans. Imagine the
sound of 18,000 hooves, the ground vibrating before the first lance struck.
Infantry lines depended on staying steady. The moment they wavered, panic
rippled through the ranks. The physical impact of horses smashing into men was
magnified by the psychological shock. Even if the total energy of the charge is
"only" a few dozen kilograms of TNT, it was spread over hundreds of meters of
front line, each point of contact a horse's chest or a lance's tip. Kinetic
energy in physics became chaos in battle.

### Why a three-point estimate matters

This is not just trivia for Chase's question. It is an example of how we handle
uncertainty. We rarely know the exact mass, speed, or headcount. But instead of
giving up, we set a low, a most likely, and a high case. This three-point
estimate is common in project management and risk analysis. It bounds the
possible, shows us the sensitivity to assumptions, and provides clarity where
legend gives us none. The hussars' charge will always be remembered in song, but
the estimate reminds us that history can be quantified, even if roughly.

## September 12

And so, on September 12, when we recall the day the hussars arrived, we can
remember both the legend and the math. It was not the supernatural beating of
wings that broke the siege. It was thousands of horses, armored men, and
sharpened lances, carrying between 12 and 24 kilograms of [TNT
equivalent](https://www.osti.gov/servlets/purl/10168254) at the spearhead,
multiplied across a wave six times that size. Enough energy to change history,
focused on a single hillside outside Vienna.

Sabaton may put it to music. Chase may put it as a question. But the answer is
that the winged hussars arrived not only with courage and faith, but with the
unstoppable arithmetic of kinetic energy.

