---
id: the-lion-and-the-unicorn
title: The Lion and the Unicorn
date: 2025-01-01
author: k3jph
layout: post
permalink: /2025/01/01/the-lion-and-the-unicorn
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn.webp
categories:
 - Blog 
tags:
 - heraldry 
 - England
 - Scotland
 - Great Britain
 - United Kingdom
---

The Royal Coat of Arms stands as one of the most enduring symbols of monarchy,
carrying layers of historical and cultural significance. Beyond its decorative
function, it encapsulates the [identity and authority of the Crown](https://www.royal.uk/), serving as a
visual shorthand for governance, sovereignty, and tradition. Over the centuries,
it has adorned everything from official documents to courtrooms and even
currency, embedding itself deeply in the public consciousness.

<div class="item col-md-4 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-12">
          <img 
              class="featured-img mx-auto" 
              src="/assets/img/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/Royal_Arms_of_the_Kingdom_of_Scotland.svg" 
              alt="Royal Arms of the Kingdom of Scotland" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Royal Arms of the Kingdom of Scotland</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

In 1603, the Union of the Crowns brought England and Scotland under a single
monarch with [James VI of Scotland ascending to the English throne as James I](https://www.nms.ac.uk/discover-catalogue/a-brief-history-of-james-vi-and-i).
This union was personal rather than political, and the heraldic traditions of
both kingdoms remained distinct, reflecting the separate institutions and
identities of the two nations. A century later, the Acts of Union in 1707
formally united the parliaments of England and Scotland, creating the Kingdom of
Great Britain. Even then, heraldry continued to respect the individuality of
each nation within the union.

The Royal Coat of Arms, in its distinct forms for use in Scotland and England,
provides a window into this dual identity. It showcases not only the unity of
the monarchy but also the persistence of national traditions and pride. The
evolution of these coats of arms over the centuries tells a story of
negotiation, adaptation, and mutual recognition that continues to resonate
today.

## The Heraldry of Scotland

<div class="item col-md-4 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-12">
          <img 
              class="featured-img mx-auto" 
              src="/assets/img/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/MaryQueenofScotsSeal.webp" 
              alt="The Scottish Lion on first seal of Mary, Queen of Scots" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The Scottish Lion on first seal of Mary, Queen of Scots</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

The heraldic traditions of Scotland long predate the Union of the Crowns
in 1603. The central element of the Scottish royal arms--the lion rampant on a
red field surrounded by a double tressure fleury-counter-fleury--is among the
most recognizable symbols of Scotland's national identity. This design, formally
known as the "Royal Banner of Scotland," was adopted in the 12th century during
the reign of [William I (William the
Lion)](https://www.robertson.org/D_King_William.html), who is credited with
introducing the lion rampant as the symbol of royal authority in Scotland.

The lion as a royal emblem has deep roots in medieval heraldry, symbolizing
strength, courage, and sovereignty. Its use by William I reflects Scotland's
growing sense of autonomy and power during his reign, particularly in the face
of external pressures from England. The double tressure fleury-counter-fleury
surrounding the lion is believed to have been added as a mark of alliance and
protection, possibly signifying the "Auld Alliance" with France.

By the late Middle Ages, the arms of Scotland had become a key element of the
kingdom's identity, used on royal seals, banners, and official documents. The
lion rampant was so central to the heraldic identity of Scotland that it
retained its prominence even after the personal union of the crowns in 1603.
Under James VI and I, the lion rampant was incorporated into the new quartered
arms of the United Kingdom, occupying the second quarter when displayed in
England and the first quarter in Scotland, reflecting its continued
significance.

## Historical Context

### The Union of the Crowns (1603)

<div class="item col-md-4 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-12">
          <img 
              class="featured-img mx-auto" 
              src="/assets/img/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/Royal_Coat_of_Arms_of_the_Kingdom_of_Scotland_(Variant_1).svg" 
              alt="The arms of the Kingdom of Scotland under James VI" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of the Kingdom of Scotland under James VI</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

In 1603, the ascension of James VI of Scotland to the English throne as James I
marked the first time the two kingdoms shared a monarch. This [Union of the
Crowns](https://scottishhistorysociety.com/the-union-of-1603/) did not merge the
governments of Scotland and England, but it did necessitate a delicate balancing
act in the realm of heraldry. James sought to emphasize his new role as ruler of
both nations while respecting their distinct identities.

To symbolize this duality, James commissioned a unified coat of arms that
incorporated elements from both countries. The lion rampant of Scotland,
ensconced within a double tressure fleury-counter-fleury, joined the three lions
passant guardant of England. [Ireland's
harp](https://epicchq.com/story/how-the-harp-became-the-symbol-of-ireland/), a
nod to the kingdom's complex relationship with the Crown, completed the design.
Each symbol was carefully arranged to maintain parity: in Scotland, the lion
rampant occupied the first and fourth quarters of the shield, whereas in
England, the three lions held that position, pushing Scotland's lion to the
second quarter.

This quartered design became a powerful expression of unity under a single
monarch. It balanced tradition with innovation, ensuring that the heraldic
emblems remained representative of their respective nations while visually
affirming James's dual authority. Early depictions of this coat of arms--found
on royal seals, coinage, and architecture--highlight the intentional symmetry,
with no single kingdom given absolute primacy.  From this point on, the arms of
Scotland, and later the United Kingdom in Scotland, [followed the pattern
described before](/2024/11/03/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms).

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img 
              class="featured-img mx-auto" 
              src="/assets/img/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/arms-james-i-english.svg" 
              alt="The arms of the Kingdom of England under James I and VI" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of the Kingdom of England under James I and VI</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img 
              class="featured-img mx-auto" 
              src="/assets/img/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/arms-james-i-scottish.svg" 
              alt="The arms of the Kingdom of Scotland under James I and VI" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of the Kingdom of Scotland under James I and VI</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

### The Acts of Union (1707)

The [Acts of Union in
1707](https://scottishhistorysociety.com/the-union-of-1707-the-historical-context/)
brought the parliaments of Scotland and England together to form the Kingdom of
Great Britain, unifying them politically under a single legislative body. This
integration extended beyond governance, prompting adjustments in heraldic
practices to reflect the new constitutional reality while preserving the
cultural distinctiveness of each nation.

The Royal Coat of Arms saw minimal structural changes following the union, but
its symbolism became even more pronounced. The quartering arrangement--already
established under James VI and I--remained intact, with England's three lions and
Scotland's lion rampant alternating in prominence depending on location. In
Scotland, the lion rampant continued to hold the first and fourth quarters,
maintaining its position of honor. In England, this arrangement was reversed,
reflecting the centrality of the English lions in the southern kingdom.

This careful balance in the arms underscored the delicate relationship between
the two nations. While the union aimed to create a cohesive political entity,
the heraldic distinctions allowed for the continued expression of Scotland's
national pride and historical sovereignty. Visual elements like the placement of
symbols and the use of the Scottish Crown in Scotland reinforced this cultural
duality, ensuring that each kingdom's identity remained visible despite the
political merger.

## Heraldic Differences 

### The Shield

The shield of the Royal Coat of Arms is the central element of its design, and
its arrangement reflects the complex relationship between England and Scotland.
In the English version, the first and fourth quarters prominently feature the
three lions passant guardant, the historic arms of England, while the second
quarter displays the lion rampant of Scotland. The third quarter is reserved for
Ireland's harp, representing the Crown's jurisdiction over the island. This
arrangement underscores England's dominant position within the union, both
geographically and politically.

In contrast, the Scottish version of the arms prioritizes the lion rampant of
Scotland, placing it in the first and fourth quarters of the shield. England's
three lions are relegated to the second quarter, reversing the hierarchy.
Ireland's harp remains in the third quarter, unchanged. This deliberate
reordering reflects the historical insistence on Scotland's equal status within
the union, particularly in contexts where the arms are displayed in Scotland
itself.

The inclusion of France's fleurs-de-lis, seen in early versions of the English
arms, offers an additional layer of historical context. Retained until the Act
of Union, these fleurs-de-lis were a vestige of England's historical claim to
the French throne. Their absence in the Scottish version reinforces the
localized focus of heraldic traditions, as the fleurs-de-lis had little
resonance in Scottish identity.

These differences in arrangement carried significant political weight. In a
period when symbols were an essential part of governance, the shield's quarters
acted as a visual statement of authority and balance. The Scottish arrangement
emphasized the Crown's commitment to respecting Scotland's identity and
autonomy, a sentiment necessary to maintaining peace in a politically fraught
union. Similarly, the English version reinforced the dominant role of England
within the broader monarchy.

Illustrations of the shields capture these distinctions vividly. In English
contexts, the shield often appeared alongside symbols of centralized power, such
as the Tudor rose, emphasizing unity under an English-dominated monarchy.
Scottish depictions, however, integrated the thistle, Scotland's national
emblem, further asserting regional identity. These subtle yet meaningful
differences in visual presentation exemplify how heraldry adapted to reflect the
dual identities within the union, ensuring that both nations saw themselves
represented within the Royal Coat of Arms.

### Supporters 

The supporters of the Royal Coat of Arms are among its most visually striking
elements, and their arrangement underscores the cultural and heraldic
distinctions between England and Scotland. In the English version, the
supporters feature a crowned lion on the dexter (right-hand) side, symbolizing
England's strength and sovereignty. On the sinister (left-hand) side stands the
[unicorn, a traditional symbol of
Scotland](https://www.visitscotland.com/things-to-do/attractions/arts-culture/national-animal-unicorn).
The unicorn is shown chained, a heraldic convention symbolizing its taming under
the authority of the monarchy, a nod to Scotland's integration into the union.

In the Scottish version, this arrangement is reversed. The unicorn takes the
dexter position, asserting its primacy in a Scottish context, while the crowned
lion occupies the sinister side. This reversal is not merely aesthetic but
deeply symbolic, emphasizing Scotland's historical sovereignty and equal
standing within the union. The unicorn's position on the dexter side reinforces
its significance as a national emblem, [deeply embedded in Scottish folklore and
identity](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/see-an-artistic-history-of-the-unicorn-scotlands-odd-national-animal-180983652/).

The unicorn holds particular importance in Scottish heraldry, often associated
with purity, strength, and untamable spirit. Its depiction with a crown around
its neck and a chain underscores a dual narrative: one of independence and pride
tempered by the realities of political union. The chained unicorn is a reminder
of Scotland's status as a distinct kingdom within the broader framework of the
United Kingdom.

Depictions of the supporters often highlight these differences in subtle ways.
In English contexts, the lion's dominance is accentuated by its crown and
stance, while in Scotland, the unicorn's positioning and regal bearing take
precedence. These visual choices further emphasize the symbolic interplay of
unity and individuality within the Royal Coat of Arms, showcasing how heraldry
adapts to context while preserving the identities of both nations.


<div class="item col-md-12 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img 
              class="featured-img mx-auto" 
              src="/assets/img/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/Coat_of_arms_of_the_United_Kingdom_(2022,_variant_2).svg" 
              alt="The arms of the United Kingdom" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of the United Kingdom</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img 
              class="featured-img mx-auto" 
              src="/assets/img/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/Coat_of_arms_of_the_United_Kingdom_in_Scotland.svg" 
              alt="The arms of the United Kingdom in Scotland" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of the United Kingdom in Scotland</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

### The Crown 

The crown depicted in the Royal Coat of Arms serves as a powerful visual
reminder of the monarchy's authority, and its variation between the English and
Scottish versions reflects the distinct traditions of each kingdom. In the
English version, the arms are topped with St. Edward's Crown, the historic
coronation crown of English monarchs. St. Edward's Crown, with its arches and
cross pattée, symbolizes the continuity and supremacy of the English Crown,
aligning with its central role in the United Kingdom.

In contrast, the Scottish version of the arms features the [Crown of
Scotland](https://www.edinburghcastle.scot/see-and-do/highlights/honours-of-scotland).
This crown, distinct in its design with a single arch and fleur-de-lis motifs,
emphasizes Scotland's sovereignty and unique heritage. It is the ceremonial
crown used at state occasions in Scotland, most notably displayed at the opening
of the Scottish Parliament. The inclusion of this crown in the Scottish arms
serves as a visual affirmation of Scotland's enduring identity within the union,
even as political powers were centralized.

In official representations, these crowns often convey more than mere symbolism.
St. Edward's Crown is frequently associated with unified, imperial authority,
while the Crown of Scotland highlights regional autonomy. Together, they
encapsulate the balance of unity and diversity that defines the United Kingdom's
heraldic tradition.

### Motto and Crest

The mottos and crests of the Royal Coat of Arms add another layer of symbolism,
emphasizing both the unity of the monarchy and the distinct identities of its
constituent nations. The English version prominently features the motto "[Dieu
et mon
droit](https://www.historyextra.com/period/norman/british-royal-family-motto-dieu-et-mon-droit-meaning/)"
("God and my right"), a declaration of divine authority and the monarch's claim
to rule by God's will. This motto, used universally across the monarchy,
underscores the centralizing influence of the English Crown, reflecting its
historical dominance in the union.

In the Scottish version, a second motto, "[In
Defens](https://monarchy-of-britain.fandom.com/wiki/In_my_defens_God_me_defend)"
(an abbreviation of "In My Defens God Me Defend"), takes its place above the
crest. This motto emphasizes Scotland's unique heritage and the protective role
of the monarchy in Scottish tradition. Its placement above the Scottish crest,
rather than below the shield as with the English motto, further reinforces its
distinctiveness.

The crests themselves also differ in subtle but meaningful ways. In the English
arms, the crest features a crowned lion standing on St. Edward's Crown,
symbolizing the monarchy's strength and unity. In the Scottish version, the lion
is seated on the Crown of Scotland, holding a sword and scepter. These elements,
specific to Scottish heraldry, highlight the independent legacy of Scotland's
monarchy and its enduring symbolism within the union.

The rendering of these elements varies depending on the context. In English
representations, the emphasis on "Dieu et mon droit" and the crowned lion
reflects the centralized authority of the monarch. In Scotland, the positioning
of "In Defens" and the distinct crest elements assert regional pride and
autonomy, ensuring that Scotland's identity remains an integral part of the
heraldic narrative.

## Symbolism and Cultural Implications

### National Identity and Pride

The Royal Coat of Arms, particularly in its Scottish iteration, serves as a
vivid reminder of Scotland's enduring sense of nationhood and cultural
distinctiveness. The lion rampant, prominently featured in the arms of Scotland,
is more than a mere heraldic device. As a symbol of strength, courage, and
sovereignty, it resonates deeply with Scotland's historical narrative,
representing a kingdom that has fiercely defended its independence over
centuries of political and military struggle. The lion's association with
royalty dates back to the reign of William I, and its integration into
Scotland's heraldry remains a potent expression of national pride.

Equally significant is the unicorn, whose mythical qualities of purity and
strength have long been associated with Scottish identity. In folklore, the
unicorn is untamable, a fitting emblem for a nation often defined by its
resistance to domination. The depiction of the unicorn in chains within the coat
of arms carries complex symbolism, representing not only the union with England
but also the enduring spirit of a kingdom that retains its distinctiveness even
within a larger political framework.

The heraldic differences between the English and Scottish versions of the Royal
Coat of Arms highlight a delicate balance between the unity of the monarchy and
the preservation of regional traditions. This duality reflects the nuanced
reality of a union that sought to create a cohesive political and cultural
entity without erasing the identities of its constituent nations. By maintaining
distinct heraldic traditions, the monarchy acknowledged the importance of local
pride and history, ensuring the arms would resonate with people on both sides of
the border.

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/jenners-royal-warrant.webp"
   alt="The Royal Warrant outside Jenners in Edinburgh showcasing the use of the Scottish version of the Royal Arms (via Tagishsimon/Wikimedia Commons)"
   cap="The Royal Warrant outside [Jenners in Edinburgh](https://www.jennersedinburgh.com/) showcasing the use of the Scottish version of the Royal Arms (via [Tagishsimon/Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Royal_Warrant_-_Jenners_in_Edinburgh_-_2004-10-22.jpg))" %} 

The quartered shield is perhaps the clearest example of this balance. Its
alternating arrangement of England's three lions and Scotland's lion rampant
visually affirms the shared authority of the Crown across the two kingdoms.
However, the positioning of these symbols--determined by the location of
display--ensures that each nation sees itself reflected in a way that aligns with
its history. In Scotland, the lion rampant's position in the first and fourth
quarters reaffirms its significance, while in England, the three lions retain
their primacy.

Ceremonial uses of the arms further emphasize this balance. During state events
in Scotland, the Crown of Scotland and the Scottish version of the arms are
prominently displayed, reinforcing the unique heritage of the nation within the
union. For example, at the opening of the Scottish Parliament, the Crown of
Scotland and the Scottish arms take center stage, reminding attendees of
Scotland's enduring identity. In England, the English version of the arms serves
a similar role, presenting the Crown as a unifying symbol of governance while
subtly affirming England's centrality in the broader monarchy.

Official documents also provide an avenue for showcasing this balance. Royal
charters and proclamations issued in Scotland often bear the Scottish arms,
ensuring they resonate with local tradition, while those issued in England carry
the English arms. These practices maintain a sense of continuity and respect for
regional traditions, even in the context of shared governance.

Ultimately, these heraldic distinctions embody the complex relationship between
unity and individuality within the United Kingdom. They serve as a reminder that
while the union brought the nations together under one Crown, it also allowed
for the continuation of unique traditions, ensuring that no part of the
monarchy's history or identity was lost in the process.

## Usage of the Coats of Arms

The use of the Royal Coat of Arms varies significantly depending on location and
context, reflecting the distinct identities of Scotland and England while
underscoring the unity of the monarchy. These arms are not merely decorative;
they serve as official symbols of authority and governance, appearing in
contexts ranging from government documents to courtrooms and public ceremonies.

In England, the English version of the arms is the standard representation of
the monarchy. It appears on royal seals, passports, and other official documents
issued by the Crown. The arms are also displayed prominently in English
courtrooms, symbolizing the monarch's role as the ultimate source of justice.
Similarly, they are featured on government buildings, military insignia, and
even currency, reinforcing their association with the Crown's authority in
everyday life.

In Scotland, the use of the Scottish version of the arms is exclusive to
functions and institutions tied to the Scottish Crown. For example, the Court of
Session, Scotland's supreme civil court, prominently displays the Scottish arms
to emphasize its jurisdiction within the kingdom. The Scottish version also
appears on official documents, seals, and ceremonial items used in Scotland.
During state occasions like the opening of the Scottish Parliament, the Scottish
arms are given pride of place, often accompanied by the Crown of Scotland, to
highlight Scotland's distinct constitutional identity.

The contexts in which the arms are used also influence their presentation. In
Scotland, the prominence of the lion rampant and the use of the Crown of
Scotland in the heraldic design reinforce national pride and tradition. In
England, the emphasis on the three lions and St. Edward's Crown reflects the
central authority of the English monarchy within the union. These distinctions
are not merely symbolic but serve to affirm the shared yet diverse nature of the
United Kingdom.

{% include figure.html width="12" placement="center"
   image="/2025/the-lion-and-the-unicorn/great-seal-of-scotland.webp"
   alt="The Great Seal of Scotland at the Court of Session (via the Scottish Government/Wikimedia Commons)"
   cap="The Great Seal of Scotland at the [Court of Session](https://www.scotcourts.gov.uk/courts-and-tribunals/the-supreme-courts/the-court-of-session/) (via the [Scottish Government/Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Court_of_Session_%2853707367184%29.jpg))" %} 


Even in less formal contexts, such as the signage on government offices or the
branding of royal institutions, the appropriate version of the arms is carefully
chosen to reflect the locale and function. This meticulous attention to detail
ensures that the Royal Coat of Arms remains not just a symbol of monarchy but a
living emblem of the nuanced relationship between unity and regional identity.

## Broader Themes 

Heraldry occupies a unique space at the intersection of culture, governance, and
history. As both art and authority, the Royal Coat of Arms offers a visual
narrative that captures the evolving relationship between Scotland and England
within the union. It tells a story of negotiation, adaptation, and mutual
respect, balancing the unity of a shared monarchy with the diversity of distinct
national identities. The arms serve not only as a symbol of the Crown's
authority but also as a reflection of the values, struggles, and triumphs that
have shaped the United Kingdom. Through its use of motifs like the lion rampant
and unicorn, heraldry becomes a form of storytelling, preserving the essence of
national pride while adapting to the realities of political integration.

The differences between the Scottish and English versions of the Royal Coat of
Arms highlight this interplay between unity and individuality. From the
quartered shields to the unique supporters, crowns, and mottos, each version
celebrates the history and identity of the kingdom it represents. These
distinctions go beyond aesthetics--they affirm the cultural and political
significance of each nation within the union. The Scottish arms, with their
emphasis on the lion rampant and the Crown of Scotland, assert a proud heritage
that endures despite centuries of political change. The English arms, by
contrast, project the centralizing authority of the English monarchy while
leaving space for Scotland's identity.

In examining these heraldic differences, it becomes clear that the Royal Coat of
Arms is more than a relic of the past. It remains a living emblem, reflecting
the complex and evolving relationship between England and Scotland. By
preserving the traditions of both kingdoms, the arms offer a blueprint for unity
that respects diversity, a lesson as relevant today as it was in 1603. They
remind us that symbols are not just about what we see but also about what they
represent: the histories, identities, and futures of the people who claim them.
