---
id: false-quartering-in-heraldic-design
layout: post
title: False Quartering in Heraldic Design
date: 2025-08-11
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/08/11/false-quartering-in-heraldic-design
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/false-quartering-in-heraldic-design.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - heraldry
  - genealogy
  - graphic design
---

Heraldry sits at the crossroads of law, art, and family history. It is a
visual language with its own syntax and grammar, a system of signs that
records lineage, property and alliances. When most people picture a coat
of arms, however, they recall the quartered shields of monarchs and
magnates. The royal arms of the United Kingdom (featuring England,
Scotland and Ireland) and those of great nobles like the Howard and
Churchill families are almost always quartered. Because these famous
arms dominate the public imagination, many assume that quartering is the
_default_ form of a coat of arms rather than an exception. This
misconception has fuelled a wave of "heraldic‑looking" logos divided
into four parts and filled with arbitrary symbols--crosses, books,
flames or other motifs--that mimic heraldic quartering without
understanding its meaning. The result is false quartering: designs that
look like quartered arms but lack any genealogical, legal, or historical
basis.

{% include figure.html placement="right" width="6" 
image="2025/false-quartering-in-heraldic-design/false-quartering.svg" 
cap="A tragic false quartering via [Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/heraldry/comments/1155p0d/a_coat_of_arms_i_made_a_few_weeks_ago_i_dont_know/)" 
alt="A tragic false quartering via Reddit" %}

This post examines what quartering actually is, why it appears on the
arms of kings and dukes, and how modern designers frequently fall into
the trap of false quartering. It argues that quartering is not a
stylistic choice but a method of marshaling inherited arms; false
quartering not only breaks heraldic grammar but also erases the real
stories that heraldry was created to tell.

## What Is Quartering?

Quartering is one form of _marshalling_, the practice of combining two
or more coats of arms into a single shield to represent marriage,
inheritance or office. In the simplest sense, to "quarter" a shield
means to divide it into equal parts and place different coats in each
part. The _Quartering_ article at The Heraldry Society notes that the
term is something of an euphemism; quartering "[means the division of
the shield into any number of parts, not merely the four implicit in the
meaning of the
word](https://www.theheraldrysociety.com/articles/quartering/)." Though
the classic quartered shield has four fields (party per cross), the
number of quarterings can be larger: during the Victorian age some
shields featured hundreds of quarterings. In fact, the College of Arms
[recorded a shield with 323 quarterings for the family of Lloyd of
Stockton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quartering_(heraldry)).

Dividing the field is only one way to combine arms. _Dimidiation_
splices two coats together by cutting each down the centre and fusing
the halves; _impalement_ displays two complete coats side by side; and
_superimposition_ places one coat in an inescutcheon over another.
Quartering became popular because it allows a shield to display multiple
ancestries at once while keeping each coat intact.

{% include figure.html placement="right" width="6"
image="2025/false-quartering-in-heraldic-design/quartering-demo.svg" 
cap="Quartering demonstration (via [Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Quartering_demo.svg))" 
alt="Quartering demonstration" %}

### Origins in inheritance

Quartering emerged in the late medieval period as a way to display
inherited claims through _female succession_. Initially, marshalling was
done by dimidiation or impalement, but by the fourteenth century
quartering became the preferred method when the bearer was entitled to
multiple coats of arms. The underlying purpose, as Fox‑Davies explained,
is "to express inheritance by female succession." When an armiger
marries a woman who is _not_ a heraldic heiress, their arms are
_impaled_ – placed side by side. Only when the woman is an heiress (a
daughter whose father had no surviving sons) can her arms be quartered
by her children. The father’s arms occupy the first and fourth quarters;
the mother’s arms occupy the second and third. Each subsequent marriage
to an heiress brings additional quarterings.

Quarterings can only be acquired through an armigerous person. The
Heraldry Society emphasises that "[quarterings can only be acquired
through an armigerous
person](https://www.theheraldrysociety.com/articles/quartering/)"; a
child whose mother was the Duke of Ballynahinch’s only daughter cannot
inherit her noble quarterings unless the child is themselves armigerous.
As the blog of Chris Pigott summarises, "if you are not armigerous in
your own right, you cannot inherit [your mother’s noble
quartering](https://pigott-gorrie.blogspot.com/2015/08/sir-william-pigott-to-baronet-or-not-to.html)."
In other words, quarterings are not free decorations but records of
legitimate inheritance.

### Genealogical record, not a decorative choice

{% include figure.html placement="right" width="6" 
image="2025/false-quartering-in-heraldic-design/stowe-armorial.svg"
cap="719 quarterings of the Stowe Armorial (via [Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Stowe_Armorial.svg))" 
alt="719 quarterings of the Stowe Armorial" %}

Because quartering records ancestry, there are strict rules about the
order and number of quarterings. The first quarter must always display
the _patronymic_ arms, those of the bearer’s paternal line, and the
remaining quarterings follow the chronological order in which they were
acquired.  If there are more than four coats to display, the shield may
be subdivided into eight, 16 or more parts, or the fields may be
_grand‑quartered_, where one quarter is itself quartered. Scottish
practice often employs grand quarters: when a man inherits quarterings
from his mother, he may divide the shield into four _grand quarters_ and
place his father’s entire coat in the first and fourth and his mother’s
in the second and third.  In most traditions, there is no limit to the
number of divisions; examples include the Powys‑Lybbe family's 64
quarterings and the [Grenville arms with 719
quarterings](https://hollaherald.wordpress.com/2013/07/15/the-stowe-armorial/).

Quartered arms therefore serve as visual genealogies. They show which
families have merged through heiress marriages and in what order those
inheritances occurred. The Heraldry Society advises that "for the
ordinary display of arms the use of one coat is usually most artistic
and convenient" because quarterings can become cluttered and illegible.
Many families entitled to numerous quarterings display only a selection.
The Duke of Norfolk, for example, has a right to many quarterings yet
uses only four.

## The Allure of the Quartered Shield

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-edward-iii.svg" alt="France quartering England" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">France quartering England</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-victoria-england.svg" alt="Modern British arms, outside of Scotland" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Modern British, outside Scotland</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
     <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2025/false-quartering-in-heraldic-design/milan-arms.svg" alt="Arms of Louis XII as Duke of Milan" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Arms of Louis XII as Duke of Milan</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2025/false-quartering-in-heraldic-design/castile-and-leon-arms.svg" alt="Arms of Castile quartering León" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Arms of Castile quartering León</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

Quartered arms dominate the popular imagination because they belong to
the most visible and prestigious institutions. Starting in 1340, King
Edward III of England quartered his arms with those of France to assert
his claim to the French throne. According to the _York Historian_
article on marshalling, [Edward III's quartering of England and France
is a well‑known example of political
marshalling](https://theyorkhistorian.com/2016/11/18/banners-and-blazons-introducing-heraldry-to-history/).
When James VI of Scotland became King James I of England in 1603, the
royal arms changed again: the arms of France and England were quartered
in the first and fourth grand quarters, with Scotland in the second and
Ireland in the third. The modern [royal arms of the United
Kingdom](/2024/12/10/on-the-royal-badges) continue to display England,
Scotland and Ireland in four quarters.  Other examples include the
Kingdoms of Castile and León and the Duke of Milan, among numerous
others.

Great noble houses also accumulate quarterings as marriages to heiresses
compound over centuries. The [Howard
family](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Howard_family) (Dukes of Norfolk)
quarter the arms of Howard, Brotherton, Warenne and FitzAlan; the
[Churchill family](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spencer_family) (Dukes
of Marlborough) quarter their arms with those of the Cope family and
others; the [Douglas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clan_Douglas),
[Hamilton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Douglas-Hamilton) and
[Campbell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clan_Campbell) families
similarly display multiple quarterings. These arms are seen on palaces,
stately homes, official documents and military colours, reinforcing the
impression that a prestigious coat of arms should be quartered. .

### Misperceptions and the "high‑status look"

Because quartered arms are associated with royalty and nobility, many
assume that quartering conveys prestige regardless of genealogical
entitlement. In modern graphic design, particularly for universities,
clubs and municipalities, it is common to see a shield divided into four
quarters with different symbols in each. These designs mimic the visual
vocabulary of quartering to evoke tradition or authority. The problem is
that quartering is not simply a way to include multiple motifs; it is a
legal statement about ancestry. Using a quartered layout to assemble
random symbols is like wearing military medals you did not earn. As the
_Heraldry Society_ writes, the word quartering "[means the division of
the shield into any number of
parts](https://www.theheraldrysociety.com/articles/quartering/)" but
implies inherited coats. Treating the divided shield as a blank canvas
for unrelated elements divorces it from its purpose.

## False Quartering and Its Consequences

False quartering can also occur when designers combine arms without
respect for order or hierarchy. For example, placing the arms of two
unrelated families randomly in quarters or altering the order of
quarterings to prioritise a preferred coat breaks the rule that the
paternal arms occupy the first quarter and that subsequent quarterings
follow chronologically.   In English heraldry, one may not display the
arms of families from whom one descends only through a female line
unless the woman is a heraldic heiress. In addition, omitting part of
the chain of quarterings invalidates the entitlement.

### Problems created by false quartering

The consequences of false quartering are both aesthetic and ethical:

-   Cluttered, unreadable design. Quartered arms are inherently complex
    because each quarter contains a full coat of arms. As the Heraldry
    Society notes, quartered arms often do not reproduce well on seals
    or stationery because the charges must be engraved so minutely that
    they lose their form. When modern logos cram multiple symbols into a
    quartered shield, legibility suffers; the viewer is left with a
    jumble of tiny icons.
-   Misleading associations. A quartered shield suggests inherited
    legitimacy. False quartering can create an impression of antiquity
    or nobility where none exists. In extreme cases, it may be
    interpreted as falsely claiming descent from a family or
    appropriation of someone else's arms. Heraldry is governed by
    heraldic authorities (the College of Arms in England, the Court of
    the Lord Lyon in Scotland and others) that regulate the assumption
    and display of arms. Displaying a quartered shield without
    entitlement can therefore misrepresent lineage or infringe on
    someone's armorial rights.
-   Loss of storytelling. Quarterings tell a story about marriage,
    inheritance and property. When quartering is used merely as a
    decorative grid, the narrative disappears. The armiger's history,
    the marriages to heiresses, the titles and lands inherited, is
    replaced by arbitrary symbols. Heraldry becomes a pastiche rather
    than a record.
    
## Designing Coherent Modern Arms

Modern institutions can draw on heraldic tradition without falling into
the trap of false quartering. The key is to understand heraldry's
grammar and to design with integrity rather than imitation.

### Use a unified coat of arms

For most new arms, a single unified shield that symbolises the bearer's
identity is more effective than a quartered one. The _Heraldry Society_
advises that "[for the ordinary display of arms the use of one coat is
usually most artistic and
convenient](https://www.theheraldrysociety.com/articles/quartering/)." A
unified coat may employ ordinaries (fess, bend, chevron, cross), charges
(animals, objects) and colours to convey meaning. Because arms are
personal property, each armiger may design a unique and meaningful
blazon without assuming multiple quarterings. Modern corporate or
institutional arms can be designed with a single, simple shield that
references history or mission without mimicry.

### Marshalling with clarity

When more than one coat of arms must be displayed – for example, when
two organisations merge or when a university with multiple colleges
seeks to represent its components – marshalling can be used
appropriately. _Quartering_ is justified when there is a genuine
genealogical link (e.g., merging institutions with existing armorial
bearings), but designers should consider _impalement_ or _grand
quartering_ as alternatives. Each method has its rules. Marshalling
should respect the precedence of arms, ensure legibility and avoid
unnecessary proliferation of quarterings.

### Preserve heraldic integrity

Designers can avoid false quartering by following a few principles:

-   Respect inheritance: Only quarter arms when there is a legitimate
    right through heiress marriages. Ensure the arms you are quartering
    belong to you or your institution.
-   Follow order and placement: The patronymic arms always occupy the
    first quarter; additional quarterings follow in chronological order.
-   Avoid random symbols: Do not use quartering as a way to cram
    unrelated charges onto a shield. If multiple symbols are desired,
    consider using a chief, base or other _ordinaries_ to separate
    elements within a single coat.
-   Simplify for modern use: Remember that arms will appear on
    letterheads, websites and merchandise. Complex quarterings may
    become illegible. Simplicity aids recognition and honours heraldic
    tradition.
    
## Conclusion

Quartering is one of heraldry's most striking devices, but its beauty
derives from its history. It is a visual genealogy, not a decorative
grid. True quartering records the marriages, inheritances and claims of
armigerous families. False quartering, by contrast, uses the appearance
of quartering without the substance: it divides a shield into four or
more parts and fills them with arbitrary symbols or unrelated arms. This
practice misunderstands heraldry and undermines the narratives that
coats of arms are meant to convey.

Designers and institutions seeking to adopt heraldic imagery should
therefore learn the grammar of heraldry before writing in its language.
By understanding what quartering actually is, a method of joining
inherited arms governed by legal and genealogical rules, we can
appreciate why it appears on the shields of kings and dukes and why it
is inappropriate as a default. Thoughtful, well‑designed arms will
respect inheritance, tell a coherent story and avoid the trap of false
quartering. In doing so, they will honour heraldry's enduring purpose:
to make visible the bonds of family, history and identity.
