---
id: completed-the-ihgs-heraldry-course
layout: post
title: "Completed the IHGS Heraldry Course"
date: 2025-01-29
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/01/29/completed-the-ihgs-heraldry-course
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/completed-the-ihgs-heraldry-course.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - heraldry
---

Studying heraldry is both an intellectual and practical pursuit,
requiring a strong grasp of history, art, and precise language. Over the
past months, I have worked through the **Heraldry Course** offered by
the **Institute of Heraldic and Genealogical Studies (IHGS)**, and as of
this month, I have officially completed the program.

### The IHGS and Its Heraldry Program

The **[Institute of Heraldic and Genealogical Studies
(IHGS)](https://www.ihgs.ac.uk)**, based in Canterbury, has long been
one of the leading institutions for formal education in heraldry. It
offers a structured approach to understanding the principles of
heraldry, covering everything from the basics of blazoning to the
application of heraldry in genealogical research. The **Heraldry
Course**, which can be explored in more detail on [the IHGS
website](https://www.ihgs.ac.uk/courses-heraldry), consists of six
lectures, each with an accompanying assignment, requiring both
theoretical understanding and practical application.

The course provides an in-depth exploration of:
- **Heraldic design principles** – The structure and rules governing arms.
- **Blazoning and terminology** – The precise language used to describe arms.
- **Heraldic practice in genealogy** – How heraldry informs and supports historical research.

### Progress Toward the Diploma in Heraldry (DipHS)

This certification is more than just a standalone achievement. It is a
key milestone in my broader goal of earning the **Diploma in Heraldry
(DipHS) from The Heraldry Society**. That diploma, which requires
passing three examination levels, represents a formal recognition of
expertise in heraldry. Completing the IHGS program provides a solid
foundation for pursuing that next step, and more information about the
requirements can be found on [The Heraldry Society’s examination
page](https://www.theheraldrysociety.com/examinations/).

### The Broader Journey in Heraldic Studies

Beyond the IHGS program, I am also engaged in **the Royal Heraldry
Society of Canada’s (RHSC) certification program**. [Last year, I
completed Level 2 of their **Heraldry Proficiency
Program**](/2024/08/16/completed-level-2-of-the-rhscs-heraldry-proficiency-program),
which builds upon fundamental heraldic knowledge and introduces more
advanced blazoning techniques. These two programs—IHGS and
RHSC—complement each other, reinforcing different aspects of heraldic
study. Those interested in learning more about the RHSC’s program can
find details on [the RHSC
website](https://www.heraldry.ca/content/pp_intro.php).

### What Comes Next?

With the **IHGS course complete**, my focus now shifts toward further
advancing my heraldic studies. That means preparing for the **DipHS
exams**, engaging in more advanced research, and continuing to refine my
knowledge of blazoning, historical context, and the evolution of
heraldic traditions.

Heraldry remains one of the most fascinating intersections of history,
art, and identity, and each step in this journey brings new insights
into how it continues to shape and reflect cultural heritage.  For those
interested in structured study, the **IHGS Heraldry Course** is an
excellent place to start, whether as a standalone achievement or as part
of a longer journey toward formal heraldic qualifications.

{% include figure.html width="12"
   image="2025/completed-the-ihgs-heraldry-course/JHoward-IHGS-Heraldry-Cert.webp" border=true
   alt="Certificate from the Institute of Heraldic and Genealogical Studies awarded to Dr. James Patrick Howard, II for completing the Heraldry Course in 2025"
   cap="Completion certificate from the IHGS, certifying successful completion of the Heraldry Course in 2025" %}
   
Or you can [download the PDF here](/assets/docs/JHoward-IHGS-Heraldry-Cert.pdf)
