---
id: by-the-arms-know-the-man
layout: post
title: By the Arms, Know the Man
date: 2025-10-16
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/10/16/by-the-arms-know-the-man
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/by-the-arms-know-the-man.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - heraldry
  - genealogy
  - lineage societies
  - identity
  - symbolism
---

I am pleased to say that I have recently been accepted into the [Order of
Americans of Armorial Ancestry
(OAAA)]([https://armorialorg.com/](https://armorialorg.com/)). For those
unfamiliar, this is a lineage society devoted to Americans who can demonstrate
descent from an ancestor who bore a coat of arms under European heraldic law.
That may sound niche, and it is, but it is also one of the most intellectually
satisfying affiliations I have taken on. Among [lineage societies](/ancestry),
this may be the only one where it makes sense to add every eligible supplemental
you can document. Each one is not just another name on a tree, but a legal
affirmation of inherited heraldic rights. There is something compelling about
that: a record of ancestral identity, codified in color and symbol, across
borders and generations.

The OAAA was founded in 1903, during the golden age of American lineage
societies, by a small group of genealogists and heraldic enthusiasts led by Mrs.
William Gerry Slade. Unlike many of its contemporaries, which center on military
service, colonial governance, or royal ancestry, the Order is unique in its
singular focus: membership is limited to Americans who can prove descent from an
ancestor who bore a coat of arms under the rules of recognized heraldic
authorities in Europe.

That is not as esoteric as it might sound. Armorial descent simply means that
one of your forebears had a lawful right to a heraldic device, and that you can
document both that right and your connection to it, generation by generation. It
is less a matter of nobility than of record-keeping. As with most things
genealogical, eligibility begins with a long paper trail, and ends with a long
application form, a check, and a brief wait while someone else checks your work.

It is worth pausing here to make a critical distinction: coats of arms do not
belong to surnames. They are not family logos floating freely in the ether,
waiting to be claimed by anyone who happens to share a last name with the
original bearer. Heraldic arms are granted to individuals, not lineages, OAAA
and their use is governed by systems of entitlement. In England, that means a
grant or confirmation by the [College of
Arms]([https://www.college-of-arms.gov.uk/](https://www.college-of-arms.gov.uk/));
in Scotland, a matriculation through the [Court of the Lord
Lyon]([https://courtofthelordlyon.scot/](https://courtofthelordlyon.scot/));
elsewhere, a host of other national authorities maintain or maintained their own
rules.

Even in countries without active heraldic offices, entitlement has legal meaning
in its historical context. To claim an armorial inheritance, then, is to assert
descent from a particular individual with a documented right, not merely to
share their name, but to share their blood. The Order of Americans of Armorial
Ancestry rests on that principle. A member does not inherit a symbol because it
is decorative or resonant, but because it was lawfully borne by someone whose
life intersects their own, generation after generation, without a break.

This is more than a theoretical point. My surname is Howard, and the Howard
arms, most famously those of the [Dukes of
Norfolk]([https://www.arundelcastle.org/role-of-earl-marshal/](https://www.arundelcastle.org/role-of-earl-marshal/)),
are among the best-known in English heraldry. But I cannot, as of yet, prove a
line of descent that would entitle me to bear them. To use those arms without
that proof would not be a harmless expression of heritage. It would be, in
heraldic terms, a kind of identity theft: the appropriation of a symbolic claim
to which I am not entitled. That is why documentation matters, and why the Order
insists on it.

At first glance, the idea of heraldic lineage might seem like an awkward fit for
citizens of a republic. The United States Constitution contains no provision for
coats of arms, let alone for noble titles, peerage, or inherited privilege. The
founders were quite deliberate in excluding such things. And yet, Americans have
long been fascinated, one might say quietly obsessed, with coats of arms. Even
if our popular understanding rarely gets past novelty plaques and family crest
coffee mugs, the attraction persists. This is not just kitsch. It reflects a
cultural memory: a lingering awareness of British, Irish, and Continental
European ancestry, where heraldry once served as a legal and social identifier.

In that context, arms were not symbolic flourishes but a kind of bureaucratic
shorthand, used in seals, wills, military commissions, and land conveyances. In
America, that juridical function has faded, but the appeal has not. Here,
heraldry is less about law and more about aspiration. It gestures toward
continuity, identity, and a deeper sense of belonging, not necessarily to a
class, but to a story. And for all our protestations, Americans have never
really turned away from heraldic imagery. One of the most recognizable coats of
arms in the world is the Great Seal of the United States: an eagle bearing a
shield, clutching arrows and an olive branch, surrounded by stars. We may not
call it heraldry, but we instinctively understand what it is for.

The OAAA sits comfortably among is siblings socities: [Sons of the American
Revolution](/ancestry/sar), the [General Society of the War of
1812](/ancestry/gsw1812), and the [Order of the Founders and Patriots of
America](/ancestry/ofpa), and others of that ilk. All draw their appeal from a
similar source, a desire to locate oneself in a story larger than individual
striving. These organizations offer a framework of continuity, a link to people
and places that predate the republic itself. But while many such societies
revolve around martial service, colonial governance, or royal lineage, the
armorial societies make a subtler claim. They are not about what your ancestors
did, but what they were entitled to bear. The right to a coat of arms is not a
narrative of action, but a statement of identity. It is an abstract credential,
yes, but also a personal one, inherited in name, in blood, and, at least
symbolically, in honor.

There is a seriousness to it. Applications are vetted, pedigrees scrutinized,
and heraldic entitlements evaluated with care. This is not [costume drama for
antiquarians,]([https://www.sca.org/](https://www.sca.org/)) nor is it a club
for those content to misread clip art. Many members of the Order are students of
heraldry in the technical sense: they understand blazon as a formal language,
recognize the rules of marshalling, and can speak fluently about the
significance of tinctures, ordinaries, and charges. The Order holds meetings,
issues insignia, and occupies a corner of American genealogical life where
ceremonial decorum still matters. Ribbons are worn correctly. Medals are
displayed according to precedence. The symbolism is not ironic. It is earned.

{% include figure.html
    image="ancestry/oaaa/hoar-arms-full.svg" 
    placement="right" width="4"
    cap="Arms of John Hoar of Massachusetts"
    alt="Arms of John Hoar of Massachusetts" %}

Why, then, do Americans do this? What compels the citizen of a nation founded in
rebellion against crowns and quarterings to seek connection to a forebear
granted a coat of arms by the College of Arms, the Lord Lyon, or some
long-abolished heraldic court? In my case, the answer is a man I had never heard
of until I began this process: [John Hoar of Massachusetts](/ancestry/oaaa). He
was not just a name in a pedigree chart. He was a seventeenth-century lawyer of
formidable reputation, a negotiator with Native nations during some of the most
fraught years of colonial conflict, and a political figure whose legacy is only
now beginning to receive the attention it deserves. His legal work was grounded
in principle rather than expediency, and his diplomacy during [King Philip's
War]([https://dhprojects.bc.edu/s/worldsatwar/page/causes-king-philips-war](https://dhprojects.bc.edu/s/worldsatwar/page/causes-king-philips-war))
helped secure the release of captives when cooler heads were in short supply. He
was, by the standards of his age or any other, impressive.

Before I undertook this research, I knew nothing of John Hoar. I had no reason
to suspect that a colonial lawyer from Concord would emerge from the archival
dust bearing a double-headed eagle and a long record of honorable service. And
yet here he is, standing at the head of a line that leads, eventually, to me.
This is what heraldry makes possible: not just the recovery of facts, but the
restoration of meaning. That eagle is not just a motif. It is a sign that
someone, long ago, stood for something, and that their descendants have not
entirely forgotten how to look up.

There is, of course, a certain irony in all of this. The mottoes are in Latin,
the arms are drawn from European systems of nobility, and the whole affair
carries the scent of old vellum and red sealing wax. But paradoxically, that is
what makes it so American. No one is born into the Order by legal right or
feudal custom. One must choose to seek the past, to gather the evidence, to make
the case. In that sense, it is an act not of inherited privilege, but of civic
intention. It reflects the American habit of assembling identity from fragments,
by choice, by effort, and, in this case, by affidavit. It is heraldry in the key
of democracy: self-affirmed, painstakingly documented, and voluntarily upheld.

{% include figure.html
  image="ancestry/oaaa/adams-arms-full.svg"
  placement="right" width="4"
  cap="Arms of Henry Adams of Massachusetts"
  alt="Arms of Henry Adams of Massachusetts" %}

We remain, as ever, a nation that claims to scorn titles while founding clubs to
celebrate them. The OAAA is less a contradiction than a reflection, not of
aristocracy, but of our peculiar national way of engaging with the past. We want
the pageantry without the privilege, the symbolism without the structure, the
heraldry without the herald. And in the end, that is exactly what we have
created: a republic where memory is optional, but all the more powerful for
being chosen.

My first supplemental application to the Order, in right of [Henry Adams of
Braintree, Massachusetts](/ancestry/ofpa), has now been accepted. He is widely
identified in colonial sources as bearing *Argent, on a cross Gules, five
mullets Or*, a bold and ecclesiastical design that appears frequently in early
American heraldic literature. Since that success, I have submitted supplemental
applications for four more ancestors, each with their own distinct arms and
histories. The process is meticulous, yes—but also deeply rewarding. Each
submission is not just a claim, but an act of preservation, a restoration of
identity one shield at a time.
