---
id: the-electoral-college-was-designed-to-disenfranchise
layout: post
title: "The Electoral College was Designed to Disenfranchise"
date: 2025-05-26
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/05/26/the-electoral-college-was-designed-to-disenfranchise
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/the-electoral-college-was-designed-to-disenfranchise.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - American history
  - constitutional law
  - electoral college
  - slavery
  - public affairs
---

Every four years, Americans are reminded that they do not elect the president
directly. They vote for electors, members of something called the [Electoral
College](https://www.archives.gov/electoral-college/about), who cast the real
ballots for president a few weeks later, typically with no fanfare. Most people
cannot name an elector, have never met one, and likely never will. Yet these
obscure intermediaries have delivered the presidency to five candidates who lost
the popular vote, most recently in 2016.

The Electoral College is undemocratic by design. It distorts political power
across states, inflates the influence of smaller and whiter populations, and has
deep structural ties to slavery.  We are here to explore how and why the
Electoral College came into being.  To understand the Electoral College, you
have to understand what the framers feared: mob rule, legislative dominance, and
the possibility of states, especially the slaveholding ones, losing control of
their internal systems. What they created was a constitutional patchwork
intended to balance federalism, elite control, and sectional interest. The
Electoral College was not a mistake.  It was a solution. A terrible one, but a
solution nonetheless.

## 1787's Political Engineering for Choosing a President

The Electoral College did not appear fully formed in the Constitution. It was
the outcome of months of argument, multiple committee rewrites, and several
failed proposals. When the Constitutional Convention convened in the summer of
1787, the framers agreed that the country needed a single executive. How to
select that executive, however, was another matter entirely.

[James Wilson of
Pennsylvania](https://constitutioncenter.org/blog/forgotten-founders-james-wilson-craftsman-of-the-constitution),
one of the more democratic-minded framers, proposed direct election by the
people. Gouverneur Morris, never shy about speaking his mind, agreed. He argued
that the people were the most legitimate source of authority and that only a
national popular vote would give the president real democratic legitimacy:

> He ought to be elected by the people at large, by the freeholders of the
> Country. That difficulties attend this mode, he admits. But they have been
> found superable in N. Y. & in Cont. and would he believed be found so, in the
> case of an Executive for the U. States.  — _Gouverneur Morris, July 19, 1787_
> (Madison's Notes)

Morris's point was clear. Even if a national popular vote was desirable in
theory, it posed logistical challenges in a republic that stretched from the
Atlantic coast to the Appalachians and had no national media, no formal
political parties, and little capacity for shared political communication.

Other delegates strongly disagreed with any plan that relied on popular
election. [Roger Sherman of
Connecticut](https://connecticuthistory.org/roger-sherman-revolutionary-and-dedicated-public-servant/),
for example, believed that ordinary voters would lack the information necessary
to make a responsible choice. George Mason of Virginia went further, warning
that the public would be misled by "[designing
men](https://www.consource.org/document/george-washington-to-george-mason-1769-4-5/)"
and that a national popular vote would open the presidency to demagoguery.

The alternative was to have Congress choose the president. This idea had strong
initial support. It was efficient and kept power close to those already elected
to represent the people. James Madison himself initially favored this model. But
others, including Morris again, worried that this would tie the president too
closely to the legislature and violate the principle of separation of powers. As
Morris put it, if Congress chose the president, "[he will be the mere creature
of the
Legislature](https://teachingamericanhistory.org/resource/the-constitutional-convention/debates/0717-2/)."

That left a third path: having the states choose.

By late July, the Convention began moving toward a compromise model. A small
committee recommended a system in which each state would appoint a number of
electors, equal to its total representation in Congress. These electors would
meet in their respective states and cast ballots for president. If no one
received a majority, the House of Representatives would decide the election,
voting by state delegations.

This solution had three key features:
-   It allowed states to retain a role in selecting the president, reinforcing
    federalism.
-   It incorporated popular input indirectly, since many states would eventually
    allow the public to vote for electors.
-   It insulated the process from direct influence by Congress and, at least in
    theory, from foreign interference or mass manipulation.
    
Madison summarized the tradeoffs succinctly:

> The election of the president is pretty well guarded. I venture somewhat
> further; and hesitate not to affirm that if the manner of it be not perfect,
> it is at least excellent.  — _Federalist No. 68_

In short, the Electoral College was not anyone's first choice. It was an
architectural solution to a structural problem. The delegates could not agree on
what a national election should look like, did not trust Congress to handle it,
and were deeply suspicious of too much democracy. What emerged was a compromise
that gave states significant power over the process, while layering in enough
complexity to keep any one faction from dominating.

It was also, crucially, a system that made room for slavery. 
        
##  What Hamilton Claimed It Did

When it came time to explain the Constitution to the public, Alexander Hamilton
took up the task of defending the Electoral College. In _Federalist No. 68_,
published under the pseudonym "Publius" in March 1788, Hamilton laid out the
theory behind the system. His account was part political sales pitch and part
moral philosophy, an attempt to justify the compromise that had emerged from
Philadelphia.

He begins by noting the stakes:

> The mode of appointment of the Chief Magistrate of the United States is almost the only part of the system, of any consequence, which has escaped without severe censure  
> — _Federalist No. 68_

Hamilton's goal is to frame the Electoral College as a stroke of constitutional
brilliance, designed to thread the needle between public accountability and
institutional restraint. At the core of his argument is the idea that the
president should not be chosen directly by the people, nor by a standing body
like Congress, but by a temporary group of carefully selected individuals.

> The immediate election should be made by men most capable of analyzing the
> qualities adapted to the station, and acting under circumstances favorable to
> deliberation...A small number of persons, selected by their fellow-citizens
> from the general mass, will be most likely to possess the information and
> discernment requisite to such complicated investigations.  — _Federalist No.
> 68_

These electors, Hamilton argues, would be chosen "for the temporary and sole
purpose of making the appointment," and thus would not be beholden to any
particular political interest. Their transience was supposed to be a feature,
not a bug. It would prevent corruption and reduce the chances of "cabal,
intrigue, and corruption" infecting the process.

> Talents for low intrigue, and the little arts of popularity, may alone suffice
> to elevate a man to the first honors in a single State; but it will require
> other talents, and a different kind of merit, to establish him in the esteem
> and confidence of the whole Union.  — _Federalist No. 68_

The Electoral College, in other words, was meant to be a filter. It was intended
to prevent a regional demagogue from riding popular fervor into the highest
office. By inserting a layer of deliberation, Hamilton believed the system would
help identify candidates of national stature and real virtue.

He was also concerned with foreign interference. Hamilton imagined a scenario in
which a foreign power might attempt to install a puppet in the presidency. The
electors, meeting in separate states, would be less susceptible to centralized
manipulation.

> Nothing was more to be desired than that every practicable obstacle should be
> opposed to cabal, intrigue, and corruption.  — _Federalist No. 68_

It is worth noting that Hamilton never addressed the implications of the
[Three-Fifths
Clause](https://www.theusconstitution.org/news/understanding-the-three-fifths-compromise/)
or the inflated power it gave slaveholding states within the Electoral College.
His concern was focused squarely on elite judgment, institutional independence,
and national integrity. Whether he failed to see the racial mechanics of the
system or simply declined to mention them is unclear. Either way, the omission
is striking.

There is also a profound irony in Hamilton's vision. The system he described,
electors as dispassionate experts, voting on merit, independent of party or
pressure, had already begun to fall apart by the early 1800s. Political parties
quickly took over the process. Electors became loyal partisans, pledged to vote
for specific candidates. States adopted winner-take-all rules. By 1828, the
Electoral College bore little resemblance to what Hamilton imagined.

But in 1788, the vision was intact. The Electoral College was to be a safeguard,
a stabilizer, a mechanism to protect the republic from its own worst impulses.
Hamilton had faith that a small group of qualified men would choose wisely, so
long as the public had the wisdom to choose them in turn.

## Slavery and the Electoral Formula

From the beginning, slavery was embedded in the machinery of American
governance, and the Electoral College was no exception. While _Federalist No.
68_ avoids the subject, the debates at the Constitutional Convention make the
connection explicit. The system was not just a hedge against popular passion or
legislative meddling. It was also a way to preserve political power for the
slaveholding South.

The mechanism came through the apportionment of representatives. Each state's
number of electoral votes is equal to the sum of its House delegation and its
two Senators. But the number of seats in the House of Representatives was
determined by population, and here the Three-Fifths Compromise did its work. For
purposes of representation and taxation, enslaved persons would be counted as
three-fifths of a person.

This rule had nothing to do with the humanity of the enslaved. It was pure
political arithmetic. Southern states demanded credit for their enslaved
populations while refusing to grant them rights or recognition. The result was
an artificial boost in House seats—and thus electoral votes—for slaveholding
states.

James Madison laid it out plainly during the Convention:

> The right of suffrage was much more diffusive in the Northern than the
> Southern States; and the latter could have no influence in the election on the
> score of the Negroes. The substitution of electors obviated this difficulty
> and seemed on the whole to be liable to fewest objections.  — _[Madison's
> Notes, July 19,
> 1787](https://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/debates_719.asp)_

In other words, if the president were chosen by direct popular vote, enslaved
people would not count. But if representation was based on the Three-Fifths
formula, then the South would benefit from their presence, even as those same
people had no political rights. The move to an Electoral College, tethered to
House apportionment, guaranteed that benefit.

The Electoral College was not _presented_ as a pro-slavery measure, but it
didn't have to be; it was obvious. It allowed Virginia to emerge as the dominant
force in early presidential politics, with its massive enslaved population
pushing its electoral strength far beyond its number of eligible voters. The
first president, [after the Twelth
Amendment](https://constitution.congress.gov/constitution/amendment-12/), from a
non-slave state would not take office until 1861.

It is telling that this issue rarely appeared in public discourse during the
ratification debates. _The Federalist Papers_ did not mention slavery in
connection with the Electoral College. Nor did most pamphlets or broadsides. But
the math was clear to anyone who cared to do it.

## Structural Effects and Early Outcomes

If the Electoral College was designed to preserve political balance among the
states, it failed, at least from the perspective of equal democratic
representation. But if it was designed to entrench Southern political power,
particularly for states with large enslaved populations, it succeeded
immediately and for decades.

The early presidency reads like a roll call of Virginia slaveholders. George
Washington, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and James Monroe—all Virginians,
all enslavers—held the office for 32 of the Constitution's first 36 years.
Virginia's outsized influence was not accidental. Thanks to the Three-Fifths
Compromise, its electoral vote count reflected not only its free population but
also a massive enslaved population that had no say in the political process.

For example, in the election of 1800, Virginia had a free population of
approximately 530,000 and an enslaved population of over 345,000. The
three-fifths formula added the equivalent of more than 200,000 people to its
apportionment base. That translated directly into additional House seats and, by
extension, electoral votes. Pennsylvania, which had a larger free population,
ended up with fewer electors.

This imbalance had concrete political effects. Jefferson's victory in 1800
hinged on the extra electoral votes that the South received because of slavery.
Had the electoral college been based on the number of voters, rather than the
number of inhabitants (free and enslaved), [John Adams would have been reelected
in
1800](https://akhilamar.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Voting-History-The-Real-Reason-the-Electoral-College-Exists-Time.pdf).

This was not an anomaly. Madison and Monroe likewise benefited from the South's
built-in bonus. Even after the so-called Era of Good Feelings began to wane, the
political structure of the Electoral College continued to favor the South. By
1836, seven of the first eight presidents had come from Virginia or had strong
political roots in the South. The presidency of John Adams stands out not as the
norm, but as the exception.  The system worked exactly as intended. The problem,
of course, was the intent.

## What the Electoral College Became

Whatever the framers imagined the Electoral College would be, it did not stay
that way for long. The system was barely in operation before it began
transforming into something entirely different, driven not by thoughtful
electors exercising independent judgment, but by political parties enforcing
partisan loyalty.

From the outset, _Federalist No. 68_ had promised a firewall. Electors, chosen
for their wisdom and detachment, would stand between the passions of the
populace and the office of the presidency. But this idea collapsed almost
immediately. By the election of 1800, the rise of political parties had already
turned electors into functionaries. They were expected to vote in lockstep for
their party's candidate, and any deviation was treated as a betrayal.

The original Constitution did not even anticipate political parties. The framers
were wary of what they called "factions," and the idea that entire elector
slates would be pledged to specific candidates simply did not enter into the
design. But once Jefferson's Democratic-Republicans and Adams's Federalists
squared off in 1796 and 1800, party identity became the driving force behind
presidential politics.

That shift had immediate consequences. The tied vote between Jefferson and Aaron
Burr in 1800, both of whom received 73 electoral votes, threw the election into
the House of Representatives and nearly broke the system. The result was the
Twelfth Amendment, ratified in 1804, which required electors to vote separately
for president and vice president.

The other major development was the rise of winner-take-all allocation. The
Constitution allows each state legislature to decide how its electors are
chosen. In the early years, many states used legislative appointment or
district-based voting. But by the 1830s, most states had shifted to awarding
_all_ of their electoral votes to the candidate who won a _plurality_ of the
statewide vote. This practice was not required, but it spread quickly because it
maximized partisan power. If your side won a state by even a narrow margin, you
got all of its electors. The loser got nothing.

This created the familiar battleground map we know today, where presidential
candidates focus almost entirely on a handful of swing states while ignoring the
rest. It also ensured that electors would never be independent actors. They
would be party loyalists, chosen for their reliability and obedience. In some
states, they were, and still are, required by law to vote as pledged.

The myth of the "deliberative elector" died before it was ever fully born. There
are scattered exceptions, so-called "faithless electors," but they have been
vanishingly rare, and never decisive. What the framers designed was an elite
safeguard against populist chaos. What emerged was a partisan counting
mechanism, dependent on state legislatures and shaped by political calculus. The
original theory had been buried under practice by the time Andrew Jackson
reached the White House. The Electoral College survived, but not in the form
anyone in 1787 would have recognized.

## The Electoral College Today

The Electoral College was not a blunder. It was a compromise. And like most
compromises at the Constitutional Convention, it was built to hold together a
fragile political coalition. It tried to satisfy large and small states, slave
and free states, federalists and anti-federalists, and a roomful of men who
deeply distrusted direct democracy.

The result was not just complex. It was strategic. The Electoral College was
structured to limit the power of the general population, preserve the influence
of state governments, and, in no small part, secure the political advantage of
slaveholding states. These were not bugs in the system. They were features.

Over time, the Electoral College mutated. Political parties seized control.
States adopted winner-take-all rules. Electors became ceremonial. But the core
structural distortions remain. Smaller states still have disproportionate
influence. A handful of swing states still decide national outcomes. And
candidates can, and do, win the presidency without winning the most votes.

We were told it was a filter. It became a funnel. We were told it would check
the worst impulses of the public. It delivered presidents who lost the popular
vote. We were told it was neutral. It was never neutral.

The framers designed the Electoral College for a country that no longer exists,
if it ever really did. What remains is a system that frustrates democratic
participation, rewards geographic accident, and reflects the political
priorities of 1787 far more than those of the present.

So the question is not whether the Electoral College works. It is whether it
still belongs. And if the reasons for its creation cannot survive scrutiny,
perhaps the institution itself should not survive either.
