---
id: seventy-three-cents-of-civilization
layout: post
title: "Seventy-Three Cents of Civilization"
date: 2025-05-12
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/05/12/seventy-three-cents-of-civilization
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/seventy-three-cents-of-civilization.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - regulatory failure
  - public infrastructure
  - logistics
  - civic trust
  - social infrastructure
---

The [United States Postal Service](https://www.usps.com/) is one of the
most quietly extraordinary systems in modern life.

It is not magical or divine. It works because hundreds of thousands of
people make it work. Every day, in every kind of weather, they carry out
a mission that stretches across every corner of the country. For less
than the cost of a candy bar, you can send a letter from rural Alaska to
downtown Miami, and it will usually arrive in just a few days. There is
no subscription, no surcharge, and no questions asked.

We treat this as normal. It should not be.

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="2025/seventy-three-cents-of-civilization/mule-train.webp"
   alt="Image of the mule train carrying mail to Supai, Arizona"
   cap="The mule train carrying mail to Supai, Arizona" %}

We live in a world where private delivery companies often charge fifteen
dollars to ship a toothbrush across town. In contrast, the Postal
Service delivers medicine to the Navajo Nation, birthday cards to
snowbound towns in Minnesota, and daily mail to the bottom of the Grand
Canyon, carried by mule. This happens not because it is profitable, but
because someone lives there, and the postal network is designed to reach
everyone.

This is not a miracle. It is a public institution doing exactly what it
was built to do: connect a nation, reliably, affordably, and without
favor.

## The Backbone of American Logistics

The core strength of the Postal Service is deceptively simple: it
reaches everyone. Every household. Every business. Every post office
box. Every one of the [166 million delivery
points](https://facts.usps.com/size-and-scope/) across the United States
and its territories. The private sector calls this "the last mile"
because it is the hardest, most expensive part of any delivery. The
Postal Service simply calls it Tuesday.

This is not an accidental achievement. The network is mandated by
federal law, which requires the Postal Service to provide "[prompt,
reliable, and efficient services to patrons in all
areas](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/39/101)" and to do so
without discrimination. That is the universal service obligation. You
can live in a dense Manhattan high-rise or at the bottom of the Grand
Canyon in Supai, Arizona, and the mail will still arrive. Supai is the
only place in the country where delivery is made by mule train, which
continues five days a week, weather permitting, through [an arrangement
that dates back over a
century](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2025/06/mule-mail-delivery-supai-arizona/682619/).

Private logistics firms do not even attempt this kind of coverage. When
they serve rural or remote addresses at all, they often [hand off
packages to the Postal Service for final
delivery](https://artofprocurement.com/blog/supply-consolidating-the-usps-final-mile),
a practice known in the industry as "last-mile delivery partnership." In
short, even FedEx and UPS rely on USPS to go where they will not.

It is easy to take this reach for granted, but it is what makes
everything else possible. Mail delivery is not just a convenience. It is
critical infrastructure.

## It Operates at Scale with Incredible Efficiency

In 2023, the Postal Service [handled more than 127 billion pieces of
mail](https://facts.usps.com/size-and-scope/), an average of 318 million
items every single day. This includes everything from letters and
magazines to small parcels, election ballots, and prescription
medications. It is one of the largest physical delivery operations in
the world, and it does not take weekends off.

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="left"
   image="2025/seventy-three-cents-of-civilization/automated-sorting.webp"
   alt="Image of automated sorting at USPS"
   cap="Automated sorting machine at USPS" %}
   
No private carrier comes close to this scale. FedEx handled about 6.3
million packages per day in the U.S. in 2023, and UPS reported just over
18 million. Both companies focus on profitable, high-volume areas and
often leave rural and remote addresses to the Postal Service. In fact,
FedEx Ground Economy and UPS SurePost both rely on USPS for final
delivery in locations they do not serve directly. When the other
carriers say they offer nationwide delivery, they often mean they let
the Postal Service finish the job.

 
That handoff works because USPS has built a vast and deeply integrated
infrastructure. Mail is routed through a network of more than 200
processing facilities using [automated sorting
systems](https://facts.usps.com/small-delivery-unit-sorter-sdus/) that
can read addresses, apply barcodes, and organize mail by exact delivery
sequence, all at speeds exceeding 30,000 pieces per hour. The scale of
that system is matched only by its workforce. With over [500,000 career
employees](https://facts.usps.com/size-and-scope/), USPS is one of the
largest civilian employers in the country and one of the few whose
workers are physically present in every community.

It is easy to assume that such a large system must be wasteful or
outdated. In fact, the opposite is true. The Postal Service delivers
more mail, to more places, with fewer errors than any other carrier in
the country. It just happens quietly.
    
## It Does All This Without Taxpayer Money

One of the most persistent myths about the Postal Service is that it is
a drain on the federal budget. In fact, USPS is an independent agency
that is [self-funded through the sale of postage and
services](https://about.usps.com/who/profile/). It receives no tax
dollars for its operating expenses. The letter that shows up in your
mailbox was paid for by the person who sent it.

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="2025/seventy-three-cents-of-civilization/rural-carrier.webp"
   alt="Image of a rural carrier in 1908"
   cap="A rural carrier delivering mail in 1908" %}

Despite that independence, Congress still has a heavy hand on the
agency's balance sheet. In 2006, Congress passed the [Postal
Accountability and Enhancement
Act](https://www.congress.gov/bill/109th-congress/house-bill/6407),
which required the Postal Service to pre-fund retiree health benefits
seventy-five years into the future. No other federal agency or private
business has been held to such a standard. This one requirement alone
created [tens of billions of dollars in paper
losses](https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-17-404t.pdf) and distorted public
understanding of the Service's financial health for more than a decade.

The law also capped postage increases and introduced strict cost
allocation rules that made it harder to compete in a growing package
market. In short, USPS has been expected to operate like a business
while being regulated like a utility and constrained like a public
trust.

Despite those constraints, the system continues to function,
efficiently, affordably, and at a scale no private firm would attempt.
It is not failing. It is being sabotaged.
   
## It Is Under Political Attack Because It Works

The Postal Service has long been a political punching bag. It is large,
visible, and constitutionally mandated, yet it operates outside the
federal budget and without lobbyists in the room. That combination makes
it both vulnerable and easy to misrepresent.

In recent years, there have been repeated calls to [privatize the Postal
Service](https://apnews.com/article/us-postal-service-privatization-trump-musk-dejoy-692d56e701f3853af4ce914832a33124)
or [cut its services in the name of
reform](https://www.inc.com/chris-morris/usps-suggested-doge-cuts-could-impact-prices-and-mail-delivery/91164914).
These proposals often come couched in the language of modernization or
cost savings, but the core idea is simple: remove the universal service
obligation and let the profitable routes subsidize the rest. That is not
reform. That is asset stripping.

The idea is not new. The White House proposed privatization as early as
the [Reagan
administration](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-12-18/on-the-post-office-s-christmas-list-no-privatization),
and the [Trump administration revived it in
2018](https://www.govexec.com/management/2018/06/white-houses-plan-postal-service-fix-it-then-privatize-it/149195/),
arguing that USPS should compete more directly with private carriers.
But the private sector has never been interested in serving unprofitable
regions, and never will be. The Postal Service exists precisely because
the market does not solve this problem on its own.

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="ancestry/depm/postmaster-whitecounty-1931.webp"
   alt="The appointment of John Hess Adams, my fourth great-grandfather, as postmaster for Reynolds, Indiana, in 1881"
   cap="The appointment of [John Hess Adams, my fourth great-grandfather](/ancestry/depm), as postmaster for Reynolds, Indiana, in 1881" %}
   
That is what makes it a target. USPS does something no one else will do.
It delivers millions of pieces of mail a day, on time, to every address
in the country, without pricing discrimination. It connects rural
America to the rest of the country, and it does so reliably. That
reliability threatens the narrative that only private enterprise can
deliver efficiency at scale. So the Postal Service must be painted as
bloated, obsolete, or broken, even when the evidence says otherwise.  The
political attacks are not about failure. They are about success. And
success, at this scale, is dangerous to certain kinds of power.

## Lessons Learned

The USPS has long been a model of public infrastructure: vast,
efficient, and universally accessible. Yet its very success has made it
a target for privatization efforts, often justified by claims of
modernization or fiscal responsibility. To understand the potential
consequences of such moves, we can look to countries that have already
taken this path.

In the United Kingdom, the [privatization of Royal Mail began in 2013
and was completed by
2015](https://theweek.com/news/media/960851/why-is-royal-mail-failing-to-deliver).
While the government raised £3.3 billion from the sale, the aftermath
included significant job losses, with over 12,000 positions eliminated,
and the closure of numerous mail centers and delivery offices.
Additionally, executive compensation soared, with the CEO's pay nearing
£2 million, and nearly £1 billion was paid out in dividends to
shareholders. [Service quality also
declined](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/dec/22/royal-mail-collapse-cant-even-deliver-christmas-present),
leading to fines for failing to meet delivery targets.

The Netherlands, one of the first European countries to privatize its
postal service, faced its own challenges. The privatization of PTT Post
in 1989 led to [widespread criticism over service quality and labor
conditions](https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llglrd/2021687439/2021687439.pdf).
Reports highlighted that service levels reached historic lows, and many
employees lived in fear of job loss due to the pressures of a
profit-driven model .

These international examples illustrate that privatizing postal services
often leads to diminished service quality, job losses, and a focus on
profitability over public service. As discussions about the future of
USPS continue, it's crucial to consider these outcomes and recognize the
value of a publicly operated postal system that prioritizes universal
service and community needs.

## We Will Miss It When It's Gone
 
The greatest danger to the Postal Service is not failure. It is
familiarity. It works so well, and so quietly, that most Americans have
forgotten what bad actually looks like. A friend once remarked that the
United States functions so smoothly in so many domains, logistics,
infrastructure, public health, that we mistake reliability for
inevitability. The mail shows up because it always has. But that is not
a law of nature. It is the result of design, labor, and commitment.
[And its absence would be felt
immediately](https://www.brookings.edu/articles/return-to-sender-what-privatization-might-mean-for-the-future-of-the-usps/).

The stakes are not abstract. Rural pharmacies and health systems rely on
the Postal Service to deliver medications where private carriers do not
operate consistently or affordably. The [Department of Veterans Affairs
ships 80 percent of
prescriptions](https://www.uspsoig.gov/sites/default/files/reports/2023-12/23-137-r24.pdf)
through USPS, reaching veterans in small towns and on tribal lands with
critical medication, often within days.

In 2020, the Postal Service handled more than 135 million
election-related mail pieces, including ballots, registration forms, and
voter information. With decades of experience in chain-of-custody
protocols, USPS became a last line of democratic infrastructure during a
public health crisis. Any loss of capacity would erode confidence in
future vote-by-mail programs, especially in areas already underserved.

The same network that delivers ballots also delivers opportunity. Tens
of thousands of small businesses depend on USPS for affordable shipping,
especially those operating out of home offices, farms, or storefronts
far from major logistics hubs. Unlike private carriers, the Postal
Service does not penalize you for living where you live.

Then there is what you cannot track with a barcode. The sympathy card
sent by hand. The tax refund check from an overworked state treasury
office. The letter from a grandparent who never really got the hang of
email. These are small things, but they are also part of the social
infrastructure. The disappearance of that network would be felt most by
those who already have the fewest alternatives.

If the Postal Service vanished tomorrow, there would be a scramble to
rebuild it. But by then, the damage would already be done.

## Losing on Purpose

What the Postal Service offers is not magic. It is the product of
planning, scale, and the daily work of hundreds of thousands of people.
It delivers more mail to more places than any other system in the world,
and it does so without favoritism, without subsidies, and without fail.

And yet it operates under constant suspicion. It is mocked as obsolete,
burdened with mandates, starved of flexibility, and routinely threatened
with privatization. These are not the consequences of failure. They are
the penalties of competence.  The real question is not whether the
Postal Service can be saved. The real question is whether we are wise
enough to keep what already works.
