---
id: thomas-arundell-of-wardour-hero-of-the-empire
layout: post
title: Thomas Arundell of Wardour, Hero of the Empire
date: 2025-09-07
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/09/07/thomas-arundell-of-wardour-hero-of-the-empire
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/thomas-arundell-of-wardour-hero-of-the-empire.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Catholic history
  - Early modern Europe
  - Seventeenth century
  - Thomas Arundell
  - Holy Roman Empire
---

Few English nobles of the early seventeenth century lived lives as perilous or
as fascinating as Thomas Arundell (c. 1560–1639). Born into the ancient family
of Arundell of Wardour, he endured shifting fortunes under [Tudor](https://tudorsdynasty.com/) and [Stuart](https://www.history.co.uk/articles/the-stuarts-britains-unluckiest-royal-dynasty)
monarchs, served with distinction on continental battlefields, earned noble
titles at home and abroad, and saw his family become entwined with the
colonization of America. In this post we explore the life of this colorful
figure: his heritage, his military career, his steadfast Catholicism amid
persecution, and the enduring connections his family forged with the New World.

{% include figure.html width="4" placement="right"
   image="2025/thomas-arundell-of-wardour-hero-of-the-empire/arundell-arms.svg"
   alt="The ancient arms of the Arundell family (adapted from King Edward the Confessor on Wikimedia Commons)"
   cap="The ancient arms of the Arundell family (adapted from [King Edward the Confessor on Wikimedia Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Royal_Arms_of_Edward_the_Confessor.svg))" %}
   
## An Ancient Lineage and Early Life

Thomas Arundell was born around 1560 to Sir Matthew Arundell of Wardour Castle
in Wiltshire and Margaret Willoughby. Both parents came from long noble lines in
England; Matthew Arundell's mother was [Margaret Howard, a sister of Queen
Catherine
Howard](https://landedfamilies.blogspot.com/2015/11/195-arundell-of-wardour-castle-and_18.html),
and Margaret Willoughby's mother was Anne Grey, daughter of the ancient [House
of
Grey](https://tudortimes.co.uk/guest-articles/house-of-grey-mothers-and-sons).
The Arundells were one of England's oldest families; their ancestry traced back
to the Normans, and they had held Wardour since the fourteenth century. Thomas
was also a cousin to Queen Elizabeth.

In 1552 Thomas's grandfather, Sir Thomas Arundell, was executed for treason
after the fall of Protector Somerset. Margaret Howard fled to the continent with
her children. The exiled family used Margaret's surname "Howard" until their
attainder was reversed in 1554. Sir Matthew returned to England and regained
Wardour, and Thomas was raised amid the tensions between his family's [recusant
Catholicism and an officially Protestant
realm](https://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/tudors/english_reformation_01.shtml).

After the family's confiscated estates were returned, Sir Matthew Arundell
repurchased the manor of Wardour in 1570 and set about rebuilding his ancestral
seat. He engaged the [celebrated architect Robert
Smythson](https://thecountryseat.org.uk/2014/12/05/the-first-architect-400-years-on-from-death-of-robert-smythson/)
to redesign Wardour Castle into a grand country house and later bought the
neighbouring [manor of
Ansty](https://historicengland.org.uk/listing/the-list/list-entry/1300354).
Growing up amid these renovations, Thomas observed both the fragility and
resilience of noble status. The Arundells' financial sacrifices for
architectural projects also underscored their commitment to leaving a lasting
legacy for future generations.

{% include figure.html width="4" placement="right"
   image="2025/thomas-arundell-of-wardour-hero-of-the-empire/1stBaronArundellOfWardour.webp"
   alt="Thomas Arundell, 1st Baron Arundell of Wardour by Henry Meyer (via the National Portrait Gallery)"
   cap="Thomas Arundell, 1st Baron Arundell of Wardour by Henry Meyer (via the [National Portrait Gallery](https://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw35116/Thomas-Arundell-1st-Baron-Arundell-of-Wardour))" %}
   
## Family and Marriage

Arundell's family life was as full of consequence as his public career. His
first marriage, in 1585, was to Lady Mary Wriothesley, daughter of Henry
Wriothesley, 2nd Earl of Southampton, aligning the Arundells with one of
England's most prominent noble houses. This union produced three children:
Thomas, who succeeded as 2nd Baron Arundell of Wardour; Elizabeth Mary, who
married into the noble Fitzwilliam family; and William, about whom less is
known. After Mary's death in 1607, Arundell remarried the following year, taking
as his second wife Anne Philipson of Crook Hall, Westmorland. Anne came from a
distinguished northern family with ties to the border gentry and broader
networks in Cumberland and Westmorland.

The marriage was prolific. Together they had at least ten children: Matthew
(born 1609, who reportedly died young), Catherine, Anne, two daughters named
Mary (the first dying in infancy), Frances, Margaret, Clara, Thomas, and
Frederick. The younger Thomas and Frederick would play roles in the Civil War
and later management of the Wardour estate, while the daughters married into
some of the leading recusant and aristocratic families of the time. Through
these strategic matrimonial alliances, with houses such as the Eures, Somersets,
Talbots, Fortescues, and Welds, the Arundells extended their influence across
the English Catholic nobility. These alliances not only strengthened their
social position but also wove the Arundells more deeply into the network of
Catholic resistance and preservation during an era of intense religious tension
in England.

## A Military Career Amid Recusancy

From an early age, Arundell's unwavering
[recusancy](https://www.genguide.co.uk/source/recusant-rolls-catholics/), his
refusal to attend Church of England services and support of Catholic clergy,
regularly brought him into sharp conflict with Elizabethan authorities.
Throughout the 1580s and 1590s, he was subjected to heavy fines, placed under
surveillance, and imprisoned on multiple occasions for harbouring Catholic
priests, offenses now well documented in ecclesiastical and legal records. His
home at Wardour Castle, known as a hub of recusant activity, drew increasing
suspicion from the Crown, especially as anti‑Catholic statutes grew stricter.
Scholar Andrew Hopper notes that in 1623 he was formally committed to custody
for "[championing the cause of
recusants](https://dutchhq.wordpress.com/2023/05/16/52ancestors-wk20-bearded-thomas-arundell-first-baron-arundell-of-wardour/),"
a signal of how central his Catholic identity remained to his public persona.

In the early 1590s, Arundell volunteered to fight under [Emperor Rudolf
II](https://www.czechcenter.org/blog/2023/5/12/rudolf-ii%29), Holy Roman
Emperor, in the ongoing struggle against the Ottoman Turks in Hungary. This was
not merely a religious crusade but also an attempt to defend Christendom's
eastern frontier and reclaim territory from Ottoman control. At the Siege of
Gran (Esztergom) in 1595, Arundell distinguished himself in dramatic fashion: he
reportedly led a storming party over the city's walls, [tore down the Turkish
crescent, and raised the imperial standard in its
place](https://www.catholic.com/encyclopedia/thomas-arundell). The act made him
a hero in the Habsburg court.


{% include inset.html width="6" placement="right"
title="Imperial Grant to Thomas Arundell"
text="
###### Translated from the original Latin
    
The remarkable virtues by which you continue to make your noble lineage ever
more distinguished, both at home and abroad, such as that you first imbued your
heart with a liberal education, then visited foreign provinces, observed the
customs of many peoples and the cities of many nations, and thereby acquired
substantial experience of affairs; and finally, that you were roused by a rare
and singular zeal to come and serve with your own funds in this holy war which
we wage against the common enemy of the Christian name, the Turk, having come
from far and remote regions to Hungary, and that you have conducted yourself
bravely and vigorously in open battles and in assaults upon cities and
fortresses, so that you have earned the admiration of all nations and have been
commended most highly to us by our dearest brother, the Most Serene Prince
Archduke Matthias, and by the senior commanders of our army, especially through
the notable example you gave during the capture of the town of Vác near
Esztergom, when you wrested a banner from the Turks with your own hand and
presented yourself as one to be seen at the very beginning of the battle,
because of all this, we did not wish to omit the opportunity to honor you and
your lawful descendants graciously with some notable mark of our favor.
        
Therefore, by our own initiative, from certain knowledge, with deliberate mind
and sound counsel, and by the full authority and power of our Imperial
prerogative, we have created, made, and named you, the aforesaid Thomas
Arundell, who already, by inheritance from your ancestors, possess consanguinity
with the Earls in England, and all and each of your lawful heirs, descendants,
and issue of both sexes, born and to be born in perpetuity, as true Counts and
Countesses of the Holy Roman Empire. We have augmented and ennobled you with the
title, honor, and dignity of Imperial Count, just as by the present decree we
create, make, name, augment, and ennoble you.
        
And we will, and by this our present Imperial Edict, to remain valid forever, we
firmly and expressly decree that you, the aforesaid Thomas Arundell, together
with all your legitimate posterity, male and female, shall henceforth and
forever bear and possess the title, name, and dignity of Counts of the Empire,
and shall be honored, called, and considered as such both in writing and in
verbal address, in spiritual and temporal matters, in ecclesiastical and secular
affairs, and shall freely and without any impediment enjoy, use, and possess all
and each of the honors, ornaments, dignities, graces, liberties, privileges,
rights, indulgences, customs, preeminences, and prerogatives which other Counts
of our Holy Empire enjoy, use, and possess by right or custom.
        
Notwithstanding any matters to the contrary, even if such should be specifically
and expressly mentioned herein, which by these presents we knowingly override
and declare to be sufficiently abrogated by our Imperial authority.  Yet always
saving and reserving the rights and superiority of the Most Serene Princess and
Lady Elizabeth, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, our most beloved sister
and cousin.
        
Let no one whatsoever, of any rank, status, order, condition, or dignity,
however eminent, dare to infringe this page of our confirmation, ratification,
approval, corroboration, creation, authority, will, grace, and decree, or to act
contrary to it in any rash manner. Whoever shall do so, let him know that by the
very act he incurs our gravest displeasure and that of the Holy Roman Empire,
and the penalty of one hundred marks of pure gold (half to be paid to our
imperial treasury and the other half to be paid and applied to the use of those
who suffer the injury), without any hope of pardon or remission.
        
In witness of which, these letters have been signed by our own hand and
fortified with the affixing of our Imperial Seal.
        
Given at our Royal Castle in Prague, on the fourteenth day of December in the
year of our Lord fifteen hundred and ninety-five, the twenty-first year of our
reign over the Romans, the twenty-fourth over Hungary, and likewise the
twenty-first over Bohemia.

Rudolphus

By the command of His Sacred Imperial Majesty himself, Jo. Barvitius" %}


In recognition of his valor, Emperor Rudolf II conferred upon him the hereditary
title of Count of the Holy Roman Empire, a rare and prestigious foreign honor.
But the award caused diplomatic tension back home. Elizabeth I, who jealously
guarded her prerogatives over English nobles, reacted first with anger. Arundell
was briefly imprisoned in the Fleet for accepting a foreign title without the
Queen's permission, and she ordered him into temporary banishment from court.
Yet political necessity and his family's stature soon softened her stance, and
Arundell was quietly restored to favor not long after. The incident would mark
him permanently, however, as a figure straddling two worlds: the English
aristocracy and the Catholic-European nobility beyond.

Following the accension of [James VI and I](https://www.royal.uk/james-i),
Arundell found favor at court. In 1605 the king elevated him to the peerage as
[Baron Arundell of
Wardour](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Baron_Arundell_of_Wardour). This honour
recognised both his distinguished service abroad and his family's standing. The
early Stuart period allowed Arundell to rehabilitate his public life. James I
granted him a general pardon in 1603, and in 1610 Arundell took the Oath of
Allegiance, pledging loyalty to the king while clinging to his Catholic faith.
During these years he continued to seek military engagement: when a regiment of
English mercenaries was raised to support the Spanish crown against Dutch
rebels, Arundell was appointed its colonel. Although the expedition faltered,
the commission demonstrated his lingering reputation as a capable commander.
Around the same time he oversaw construction of the Banqueting House at Ansty,
an elegant building possibly designed by William Arnold, showcasing his
patronage of architecture and the arts.

Arundell's household at Wardour remained a Catholic stronghold. The family
maintained private chaplains and harboured recusant priests. During the 1610s
and 1620s, as anti‑Catholic legislation stiffened and the [Gunpowder
Plot](https://www.hrp.org.uk/tower-of-london/history-and-stories/guy-fawkes-and-the-gunpowder-plot/)
unsettled authorities, the Arundell's were fined for non‑attendance at the
Anglican parish church. Though such penalties were common among recusant
families, the scale and visibility of Wardour's defiance marked it as a
particular target. Nevertheless, the Arundells preserved the old faith at great
personal and financial cost, maintaining an unbroken Catholic identity across
generations.

## Later Life and Broader Influence

Although the high points of Arundells life centre on battles and titles, his
later years deserve attention as well. As an ageing nobleman he devoted
considerable time to managing his lands in Wiltshire and Somerset, overseeing
the completion of the new Wardour Castle and the Banqueting House at Ansty, and
ensuring his younger children were settled. His accounts show that he patronised
musicians, masons and glaziers, reflecting a genuine interest in Renaissance
culture and architecture. 

Arundell's household at Wardour Castle was known for its extravagant
hospitality, a fitting reflection of his status and Renaissance courtly ideals.
His Great Hall, refurbished in the 1570s by Matthew Arundell (Thomas's father),
hosted banquets and retained a musicians' gallery, evidencing that festive
dining was integral to the household's routine. A mid‑Tudor visitor commented on
how noble the appointments and provisions appeared in comparison to other
Wiltshire manors. Furthermore, architectural scholarship notes that the large,
paneled hall and nearby lobby were explicitly designed to accommodate sizeable
dinner parties and leisure gatherings, underlining Arundell's role as a county
magnate and host rather than a secluded recusant.

During the 1620s and 1630s Arundell corresponded with other Catholic gentry,
advising them on how to navigate fines for recusancy and the legal complexities
of taking the oath of allegiance. Letters preserved in local record offices show
him petitioning the Privy Council for leniency toward Catholic tenants and
interceding for neighbours facing prosecution. This behind‑the‑scenes advocacy
highlights another facet of his leadership: as a patriarch of a recusant
community, he accepted responsibility for the spiritual and temporal welfare of
those under his influence. He also supported educational initiatives; a [family
chronicle notes he funded the education of several nieces and nephews when their
fathers could
not](https://landedfamilies.blogspot.com/2015/11/195-arundell-of-wardour-castle-and_18.html).

Thomas Arundell died on 7 November 1639 and was buried at the family chapel near
Wardour. His life spanned the tumultuous decades of the Reformation, the Spanish
Armada, and the onset of civil war. He embodied the contradictions of his age: a
devout Catholic loyal to a Protestant crown, an English noble who became a count
of the Holy Roman Empire, and the father of a woman whose name still graces an
American county. Arundell's story reminds us that early modern English history
was not confined to the island—its actors and their descendants left footprints
across the globe.

Yet his descendants continued to shape history. The barony passed through eight
generations before being extinguished in the nineteenth century.   Through the
marriage of his daughter Anne to Cecil Calvert, his bloodline entered the
aristocracy of the New World, and the county named for her remains a lasting
monument.  Whether celebrated for his bravery at Gran, his cultural patronage,
or his familys colonial connections, Thomas Arundell remains a figure who
bridges the worlds of Tudor politics, imperial warfare and American settlement.

## Why He Remains Interesting Today

Thomas Arundell captures our interest because he connects threads that span
continents and centuries. For military historians, he is an Englishman who
fought the Ottomans and was ennobled by the emperor, a rare crossover between
English and imperial nobility. For students of religious history, his steadfast
Catholicism, fines for recusancy and open defiance of anti‑Catholic laws
illustrate the precarious position of Catholic nobles in post‑Reformation
England. His daughters marriage to Cecil Calvert ties him to the founding of
Maryland, linking the English aristocracy with colonial America. 

Thomas Arundells life is thus a microcosm of the complexities of early modern
England, encompassing courtly politics, foreign wars, religious strife and
colonial aspirations. His story continues to resonate with anyone interested in
the interplay between European nobility and the formation of America.

{% include figure.html width="12" placement="center"
   image="2025/thomas-arundell-of-wardour-hero-of-the-empire/esztergom-ostroma-1595.webp"
   alt="The Battle of Esztergom, 1595"
   cap="The Battle of Esztergom, 1595" %}
