---
id: the-railroad-was-there-all-along
layout: post
title: The Railroad Was There All Along
date: 2025-06-03
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/06/03/the-railroad-was-there-all-along
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/the-railroad-was-there-all-along.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - genealogy
  - family history
  - railroad history
  - World War I
  - Big Four Railroad
---

[Harry Lee
Williams](/ancestry/national-society-descendants-of-american-railroad-workers)
was born in August 1885 in Honey Creek Township, White County, Indiana. The son
of Thornton Robert Williams and Ida May Adams, Harry was raised in a small rural
town before eventually settling in Cincinnati, Ohio, where he would spend the
rest of his life. He married Julia McNeal across the river in Covington,
Kentucky, in 1907, likely taking advantage of the looser marriage laws there.
Their first daughter was born in Cincinnati the following year, and by the time
of the 1910 census, Harry was firmly rooted in Hamilton County.

Over the decades, Harry appeared regularly in census records: in 1910, 1920,
1930, and 1940, always living in Cincinnati’s Ward 19. He registered for both
World War I and World War II drafts. He died there in February 1950 and was
[buried in Spring Grove Cemetery](https://www.springgrove.org/). There was no
question about where he lived, worked, and raised his family. But one question
persisted: what railroad did he actually work for.
  
Family lore offered two candidates. On one side, the [Baltimore and Ohio
(B&O)](https://www.borail.org/) had long been part of family conversations. On
the other, the [Louisville and Nashville (L&N)](http://www.lnrr.org/) came up
more than once in old stories. Given Cincinnati’s deep ties to the rail industry
and both railroads, both seemed plausible. The trail, however, came down to a
single puzzling line on his World War I draft card, not in the employer section,
as one might expect, but in the address field. The handwriting, looping and
faded, looked like it might be a street address. I initially read it as
something like "666 South Kentucky," which made no geographic sense. It did not
exist in Cincinnati or anywhere nearby. What seemed like a bad address gradually
revealed itself to be something else entirely.

## The Draft Card and the Guesswork

<div class="item col-md-4 px-4 pull-right">
    <div class="card">
        <figure>
            <div class="row mb-2">
                <div class="item col-md-12">
                    <img class="featured-img mx-auto" 
                         src="/assets/img/ancestry/nsdarw/harry-lee-williams-ww1-draft-card-front.webp" 
                         alt="Harry Williams World War I draft card (front)" 
                         data-toggle="modal" data-target="#imageModal" 
                         data-full="/assets/img/ancestry/nsdarw/harry-lee-williams-ww1-draft-card-front.webp" />
                </div>
                <div class="content">
                    <figcaption class="images-caption">Harry Williams World War I draft card (front)</figcaption>
                </div>
            </div>
        </figure>
    </div>
</div>

The breakthrough, or so it seemed, came from Harry’s World War I draft card.
These cards are often rich with detail: names, addresses, occupations, even
employers. But in Harry’s case, one particular line obscured more than it
revealed.

The handwriting on the address line was cramped and inconsistent, with swooping
loops that blurred the distinction between letters. I initially read the entry
as "666 S. Kentucky, Chicago."   That interpretation would suggest a temporary
work placement in Chicago, perhaps linked to a rail terminal or yard. It aligned
neatly with family stories of railroad work, and Chicago's prominence in the
rail industry made the location plausible. But something about it was off.

Despite repeated searches through modern maps, historical directories, and
databases of street names, there was no trace of a "666 South Kentucky" in
Chicago. It did not correspond to any known depot, office, or neighborhood. The
more I looked, the more it became clear that what I was seeing might not be an
address at all.

## Shifting the Frame: Ry = Railway

The turning point came when I decided to bring in some extra help. I uploaded
the draft card snippet into [ChatGPT](https://chatgpt.com/), hoping that a
second set of eyes, artificial though they might be, could offer a new
perspective. Together, we began to break down the writing, character by
character.

That was when the first real shift occurred. The looping shape I had interpreted
as "Kentucky" started to look a lot less like a place name and more like
something else entirely. We noticed the two key letters at the end: "Ry." In
historical documents, especially employment records and correspondence from the
early 1900s, "Ry" is a common abbreviation for "Railway." Suddenly, the next
part of the line, "Chicago Div", fell into place as "Chicago Division."

This was not an address. It was a railroad assignment.

The entire phrase was reframed: instead of "666 S. Kentucky," we now had the
structure "(Company) Ry, Chicago Div." That realization opened a much wider
field of inquiry. Historical railroads frequently abbreviated their names,
especially when they linked multiple cities. Now, instead of chasing down ghost
addresses, we were hunting for a railway company, and we finally had the right
format to start asking better questions.

## Solving It Together

<div class="item col-md-4 px-4 pull-right">
    <div class="card">
        <figure>
            <div class="row mb-2">
                <div class="item col-md-12">
                    <img class="featured-img mx-auto" 
                         src="/assets/img/ancestry/nsdarw/harry-lee-williams-ww2-draft-card-front.webp" 
                         alt="Harry Williams World War II draft card (front)" 
                         data-toggle="modal" data-target="#imageModal" 
                         data-full="/assets/img/ancestry/nsdarw/harry-lee-williams-ww2-draft-card-front.webp" />
                </div>
                <div class="content">
                    <figcaption class="images-caption">Harry Williams World War II draft card (front)</figcaption>
                </div>
            </div>
        </figure>
    </div>
</div>

This mystery was not unraveled by accident. It was the result of a real
collaboration, human reasoning paired with AI assistance, each sharpening the
other. As we tested hypothesis after hypothesis, the lines between address and
employer, street and abbreviation, began to blur. What had started as a search
for "666 S. Kentucky" evolved into a layered analysis of historic railroad
terminology, document handwriting, and corporate mergers.

The "aha" moment came when we both locked in on the handwriting and read it,
definitively, as "CCC&StL Ry." Not a street. Not a mistake. Not a ghost address.
Just a perfectly normal employer, written in perfectly normal (if rushed)
early-20th-century cursive. The [Cleveland, Cincinnati, Chicago & St. Louis
Railway](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cleveland,_Cincinnati,_Chicago_and_St._Louis_Railway).

Once we had that key, everything else held firm. The Big Four had a deep and
lasting presence in Cincinnati. The Chicago Division operated through that
region, serving freight and passenger lines across multiple states. And by the
time Harry’s World War II draft card listed him as an employee of the New York
Central, the corporate transition was complete. We had not just solved a
handwriting puzzle. We had confirmed a historical continuity, tracing one man’s
working life across decades, railroad companies, and changing names.

## Final Picture

With the pieces in place, a fuller portrait of Harry Lee Williams’s working life
emerges. Born in Indiana in 1885, Harry moved to Cincinnati by 1908, where he
raised a family and built a career in the railroad industry. By the time he
registered for the World War I draft, he was employed by the Cleveland,
Cincinnati, Chicago & St. Louis Railway, the Big Four, assigned to its Chicago
Division. That line eventually became part of the New York Central Railroad,
where he continued to work into the 1940s, as confirmed by his World War II
draft card. He remained in Cincinnati for the rest of his life, passing away in
1950.

This quiet, working life might have gone unremarked if not for a scribbled line
on a government form. A few strokes of looping cursive turned out to contain a
complete story, of economic migration, industrial change, and personal
perseverance. The handwriting was not a flaw in the record. It was the record.

And solving it required a partnership. Human memory, historical knowledge, and
digital tools each had a part to play. What began as a family question, "Which
railroad did he really work for?" ended with a shared sense of discovery, where
AI did not replace the researcher, but stood beside them. Together, we chased a
name through time, and found the tracks it left behind.

<!-- Modal -->
<div class="modal fade" id="imageModal" tabindex="-1" role="dialog" aria-labelledby="imageModalLabel" aria-hidden="true">
    <div class="modal-dialog modal-lg" role="document">
        <div class="modal-content">
            <div class="modal-header">
                <button type="button" class="close" data-dismiss="modal" aria-label="Close">
                    <span aria-hidden="true">&times;</span>
                </button>
            </div>
            <div class="modal-body text-center">
                <img id="modalImage" src="" class="img-responsive" alt="Zoomed Image">
                <p id="modalCaption" class="mt-3"></p>
                <a id="modalLink" href="#" target="_blank" class="btn btn-primary mt-2">View Original Source</a>
            </div>
        </div>
    </div>
</div>

<script>
    document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
        // Attach click event listeners to all images with data-toggle="modal"
        document.querySelectorAll('[data-toggle="modal"]').forEach(function (img) {
            img.addEventListener('click', function () {
                var fullImage = img.getAttribute('data-full'); // Get the full image URL
                var modalImage = document.getElementById('modalImage'); // Modal image element
                var modalCaption = document.getElementById('modalCaption'); // Modal caption element
                var modalLink = document.getElementById('modalLink'); // Modal link element

                modalImage.setAttribute('src', fullImage); // Set the src of the modal image
                modalImage.setAttribute('alt', img.getAttribute('alt')); // Set alt text
                modalCaption.textContent = img.getAttribute('alt'); // Use alt text as caption
                modalLink.setAttribute('href', fullImage); // Placeholder for the original source
            });
        });
    });
</script>
