---
id: the-ancient-dignity-of-education
layout: post
title: The Ancient Dignity of Education
date: 2025-08-07
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/08/07/the-ancient-dignity-of-education
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/the-ancient-dignity-of-education.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - liberal arts
  - education
  - nobility
  - intellectual history
  - civic virtue
  - anti-intellectualism
  - humanism
---

In 1595, Emperor Rudolf II of the Holy Roman Empire granted a title of
nobility to [Thomas Arundell of
Wardour](https://www.oxforddnb.com/display/10.1093/ref:odnb/9780198614128.001.0001/odnb-9780198614128-e-726).
The document, composed in Latin, begins not with a list of military
victories or ancestral exploits, [but with an
observation](https://archive.org/details/titlesofhonor00seld/page/346/mode/2up):

> _Insignes etiam virtutes quibus illustre genus tuum magis ac magis
> domi forisque illustras, ut liberalibus primum disciplinis pectus
> imbueris, peregrinas Provincias adieris, multorum mores, multorum &
> Urbes videris, magn√∫mque rerum usum acquisieris..._

Roughly translated: "The distinguished virtues by which you increasingly
illuminate your noble lineage, both at home and abroad, in that you
first imbued your heart with the liberal disciplines, then journeyed
through foreign provinces, observed the customs of many peoples and
cities, and acquired a great breadth of practical experience..."

It is a striking moment. In a document that bestows formal noble status,
the first justification is education. Not a battle. Not an estate. Not
even a family name. Arundell had all of those, but is declared noble
because he studied, because he traveled, because he learned from others.
And it works the other way to, Arundell does not merely possess noble
birth; he _honors_ it through learning. Education is not an escape from
ancestry. It is a tribute to it.

This is not the way Americans tend to talk about status. Indeed, it sits
awkwardly with many currents in American political and cultural life
today. Across large swaths of the country, there is an ambient suspicion
of the educated. Anti-intellectualism is not just a feature of American
populism; it is one of its foundations. [Experts are
distrusted](https://www.trustsignals.com/blog/why-dont-americans-trust-experts-anymore).
[Professors are
mocked](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/inconvenient-facts/201905/against-the-professors).
[Liberal arts are dismissed as a
luxury](https://www.wenglinskyreview.com/wenglinsky-review-a-journal-of-culture-politics/2023/4/11/the-decline-of-the-liberal-arts),
or worse, [a scam](https://www.reflectionsofayoungbuffalo.com/blog/19).

And yet here, in the early modern period, we see something else
entirely. Nobility is not just inherited. It is cultivated. It is earned
through a commitment to the _liberal disciplines_, through exposure to
other cultures, and through the shaping of judgment that comes only from
encountering the unfamiliar. This was not a liability. It was a virtue,
and the most important one.

There is a Roman echo here. In antiquity, _virtus_ was not simply
morality or goodness. It was excellence in action, most especially the
kind that prepared a man for public service. For centuries, the liberal
arts were understood in just this way, not as a form of self-expression,
but as the intellectual and moral training required to become good
citizens and better human beings.

This connection between learning and nobility is not merely rhetorical.
It was formalized in custom and law. Charles Boutell, writing in the
nineteenth century, observed that "[Barristers at Law, Masters of Arts,
and Bachelors of Law and
Physic](https://archive.org/details/englishheraldry00boutgoog/page/n142/mode/2up)"
were customarily recognized as _esquires_. And in the British system,
_esquire_ is not just an honorific, it is a grade of the nobility. It
does not confer a peerage, but it places one within the broader
structure of social precedence, just below the knights of the United
Kingdom. That is to say: a man could be ennobled solely by virtue of his
education.

This was not a symbolic nod. It was a recognition that education,
especially in the liberal disciplines, law, and medicine, formed a class
of people entrusted with the health, justice, and instruction of the
realm. Their knowledge made them valuable. Their learning made them
honorable. And their rank followed accordingly.

That idea used to have some purchase in the United States, too. The
early American republic was filled with classical references, not
because of aesthetic snobbery, but because the framers believed
self-government required educated citizens. [Jefferson did not establish
the University of
Virginia](https://www.monticello.org/research-education/thomas-jefferson-encyclopedia/timeline-founding-university-virginia/)
by accident. Adams, though often mocked for his verbosity, [saw in
education the only defense against
demagoguery](https://constitutioncenter.org/the-constitution/historic-document-library/detail/john-adams-thoughts-on-government-1776).

There is, in this, a quiet rebuke to our present moment. For years, the
cultural tide in the United States has turned against the very things
Arundell is praised for. Against the liberal arts. Against global
awareness. Against the idea that learning itself is a noble endeavor. We
are left with a political culture that treats expertise with contempt
and treats inherited status as its own justification.

But that ideal has eroded. The democratization of knowledge, a good in
itself, has been accompanied by its delegitimization. Higher education
is too often treated as a cultural affront. "Elites" are castigated, but
the category is no longer defined by power or wealth; it is defined by
degrees. The banker is respectable. The professor is suspect.

This is not just a political phenomenon. It is a philosophical one. If
education is reduced to credentialing, and the goal of credentialing is
mere employment, then the idea of learning as a noble pursuit collapses.
The Arundell grant reminds us of a different view, one in which
knowledge is not instrumental, but formative. The reward of learning is
not a job. It is character and it is honor.

Of course, no one today is getting an imperial title for reading
Aristotle and touring the Continent. But that is not the point. The
point is that there was once a deep cultural consensus that learning
mattered, not just for utility, but for identity. It was something that
dignified the person. It was, quite literally, ennobling.

And that idea has not vanished. It is still found in the quiet resolve
of those who study the hard things without applause. It is found in the
classrooms where teachers still believe their work is meaningful, even
when it is disparaged. It is found, sometimes, in the humility of travel
and the widening of horizons that comes with it.

Thomas Arundell's title may seem quaint now, a relic of imperial
bureaucracy and aristocratic theater. But the first lines of his grant
carry a lesson that still matters. Education, serious, sustained,
liberal education, is not a badge of arrogance. It is the labor of
becoming more fully human. And there is nothing more noble than that.

