---
id: the-edmund-fitzgerald-and-fifty-years-of-memory
layout: post
title: The <i>Edmund Fitzgerald</i> and Fifty Years of Memory
date: 2025-11-10
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/11/10/the-edmund-fitzgerald-and-fifty-years-of-memory
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/the-edmund-fitzgerald-and-fifty-years-of-memory.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Great Lakes
  - disasters
  - history
  - shipping
  - maritime
---

On November 10, 1975, the SS [_Edmund
Fitzgerald_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SS_Edmund_Fitzgerald) disappeared
from radar during a violent Lake Superior storm. At 7:10 p.m., the ship's
captain, Ernest McSorley, radioed another vessel with what seemed like a routine
report: "We are holding our own." Less than a minute later, the _Fitzgerald_ was
gone. No distress signal was ever received. All twenty-nine men aboard perished.

Fifty years on, the wreck of the _Edmund Fitzgerald_ remains the most haunting
maritime disaster on the Great Lakes. It is the combination of mystery, scale,
and suddenness that keeps the memory alive. This was not a frail or aged
freighter. At 729 feet long and 13,600 gross tons, the _Fitzgerald_ was the
largest vessel on the Great Lakes when it was launched in 1958. It was a modern
ore carrier, celebrated as "the pride of the American side," built to haul
taconite pellets from mines near Duluth, Minnesota, to steel mills in Detroit
and Toledo.

For seventeen years, the ship plied the lakes without serious incident. On its
final voyage, it was loaded with 26,116 tons of iron ore pellets and bound from
Superior, Wisconsin, to Detroit. The weather turned against it almost
immediately. A low-pressure system swept across the upper Midwest, deepening
into a November gale. By the morning of November 10, waves on Lake Superior were
reported at 25 feet, with gusts above 70 miles per hour. The [National Weather
Service](https://www.weather.gov/mqt/edmund_fitzgerald) later described the
storm as comparable to a hurricane in intensity.

The _Fitzgerald_ was not alone on the lake. Another freighter, the [Arthur M.
Anderson](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SS_Arthur_M._Anderson), trailed about
ten miles behind and kept regular radio contact. The two ships relayed weather
reports and navigational updates as they attempted to make Whitefish Bay, a
sheltered harbor at the eastern end of Lake Superior.

By mid-afternoon, McSorley reported problems. The _Fitzgerald_ had taken on water
and lost both radars. She was running blind in heavy seas, relying on the
Anderson for guidance. At 3:30 p.m., McSorley radioed that "we are taking heavy
seas over the decks, have lost a couple of fence rails, and have a list." By
7:10 p.m., his final words were still confident: "We are holding our own."
Minutes later, the Anderson's radar showed the _Fitzgerald_ vanish. No wreckage
surfaced that night. Only hours later did Coast Guard cutters and aircraft begin
the search. They found lifeboats and debris, but no survivors.

The speed and silence of the sinking fueled decades of speculation. The [U.S.
Coast Guard
investigation](https://www.dco.uscg.mil/Portals/9/DCO%20Documents/5p/CG-5PC/INV/docs/boards/edmundfitz.pdf)
in 1977 concluded that the _Fitzgerald_ had likely flooded through ineffective
hatch covers, allowing water to overwhelm the cargo holds until the ship could
no longer stay afloat. Other theories include structural failure, with the
_Fitzgerald_ breaking apart on the surface before plunging beneath the waves;
shoaling on Caribou Island, opening her hull; and even the sudden impact of a
[rogue wave](https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/roguewaves.html) of unusual
size. Survivors from other ships on the lake that night described encountering
"three sisters," a sequence of massive waves that may have struck the Fitzgerald
in rapid succession.

The wreck was located in May 1976 by the U.S. Navy, lying in two main sections
in 530 feet of water, about 17 miles north-northwest of Whitefish Point. The bow
rests upright, embedded in the lakebed, while the stern is inverted.
Remote-operated vehicles have surveyed the site several times, but controversy
over disturbing a gravesite eventually led Canadian authorities to restrict
further dives. In 1995, the ship's bell was recovered and placed in the [Great
Lakes Shipwreck Museum](https://shipwreckmuseum.com/edmund-fitzgerald/) at
Whitefish Point, where it is tolled 29 times each year on the anniversary.

The loss of the _Fitzgerald_ spurred changes in maritime safety. Weather
forecasting for the Great Lakes improved. Ship design and inspection standards
were tightened, with more emphasis placed on the strength and sealing of hatch
covers. The Coast Guard recommended greater attention to watertight integrity
and to restricting cargo loading under severe weather conditions. Yet even with
these changes, the _Fitzgerald_ remains a reminder of the risks that still
accompany commercial shipping on inland seas.

Beyond regulation, the wreck entered American culture almost immediately. Gordon
Lightfoot's ballad, ["The Wreck of the Edmund
Fitzgerald"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9vST6hVRj2A), released in 1976,
turned a regional tragedy into a national legend. For many, the song is how they
first learned of the disaster, and it ensured that the crew would not be
forgotten. Each year on November 10, the museum at Whitefish Point tolls its
memorial bell, once for each man aboard.

Half a century later, the _Fitzgerald_ has become more than just a shipwreck. It
is a parable about the intersection of nature, technology, and human endurance.
The Great Lakes are inland seas, vast enough to generate storms every bit as
dangerous as those of the open ocean. A freighter that was considered
indomitable could still vanish without warning. For all the engineering
confidence of the twentieth century, the _Fitzgerald_ showed that the lakes
remained sovereign.

Anniversaries force reflection. The fiftieth anniversary of the wreck is not
just about a ship or the men who died aboard her. It is about how we remember
tragedy and how we carry forward the lessons. On November 10, 2025, ceremonies
will once again ring the bell for the crew. But the _Fitzgerald_ is remembered in
other ways, too. Museums, books, documentaries, and classroom lessons retell the
story to new generations. Mariners on the Great Lakes still trade stories of
that night as a reminder of vigilance.

There is a kind of impermanence here. We do not know with certainty what caused
the wreck. The water keeps its secrets. Families received no remains to bury,
only a list of names carved in stone. Even the ship's bell, recovered in 1995,
is a reminder that what we retrieve is partial. The full truth is gone with the
men who went down.

And yet, remembrance matters. To recall the _Fitzgerald_ is to acknowledge both
the limits of human control and the courage of those who work where storms can
still undo the best of technology. It is a story of steel and ore, wind and
water, and the fragile line between routine voyage and catastrophe.

The _Edmund Fitzgerald_ endures not because it was the largest ship, nor even
because it was lost so suddenly, but because in its loss we glimpse something
elemental: human ambition meeting natural force, and the way memory gives
meaning to both.
