---
id: when-zebra-mussels-made-the-great-lakes-clean
layout: post
title: When Zebra Mussels Made the Great Lakes "Clean"
date: 2025-10-08
author: k3jph
permalink: /2025/10/08/when-zebra-mussels-made-the-great-lakes-clean
featured_image: /assets/img/2025/when-zebra-mussels-made-the-great-lakes-clean.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - Great Lakes
  - invasive species
  - environmental science
  - ecology
  - water quality
  - public policy
  - conservation
  - biology
---

When people talk about the Great Lakes in the late twentieth century, they often
do so with an air of despair. By the 1960s, the lakes were badly polluted.
Industrial waste, agricultural runoff, and untreated sewage poured into them.
Lake Erie, in particular, was widely described as "dead" after [toxic algal
blooms](https://www.epa.gov/glwqa/lake-erie-water-quality-data) and
oxygen-deprived "dead zones" wiped out fish stocks. Even the [Cuyahoga River
caught fire in 1969](https://clevelandhistorical.org/items/show/63), a symbol of
how bad things had become.

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="2025/when-zebra-mussels-made-the-great-lakes-clean/cuyahoga-river-fire-1936.webp" border=false
   alt="The Cuyahoga River catches on fire all the time; this was 1936"
   cap="The Cuyahoga River catches on fire all the time; this was 1936" %}
   
Then, in the late 1980s, something remarkable happened: the water in the Great
Lakes suddenly looked clear. Tourists noticed they could see farther into the
water than they ever remembered. Beaches looked cleaner. The press picked up on
the story, and some even claimed that Lake Erie was "coming back."

The real reason was not new pollution controls or a miraculous rebound of
nature. It was zebra mussels.

## A stowaway from the Old World

Zebra mussels (*[Dreissena
polymorpha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zebra_mussel)*) are small, stripy,
fingernail-sized bivalves native to the Caspian and Black Seas. They were first
discovered in Lake St. Clair, between Lakes Erie and Huron, in 1988. Scientists
traced their arrival to ballast water from European freighters. Within just a
few years, they spread across all five Great Lakes and down connected river
systems. Today, they are established in [more than 30 U.S.
states](https://nas.er.usgs.gov/taxgroup/mollusks/zebramussel/).

Unlike many native mussels, zebra mussels can attach themselves to hard surfaces
using sticky threads called *byssal threads*. This gives them a huge advantage
in colonizing water intake pipes, boat hulls, rocks, and even the shells of
other mussels. They reproduce rapidly, with [each female releasing up to a
million eggs per
year](https://www.glerl.noaa.gov/res/Programs/eco_dyn/eco_dyn.html). Larvae
drift in the water until they settle, leading to dense colonies that can number
tens of thousands per square meter.

The key to zebra mussels' reputation for "cleaning up" the lakes lies in their
feeding behavior. They are filter feeders. Each mussel siphons water in,
captures tiny suspended particles, and spits the clean water out. A single
mussel can [filter a liter or more of water every
day](https://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/1994/0014/report.pdf). When multiplied across
billions of individuals, the result is staggering: entire lakes' worth of
suspended algae, plankton, and detritus removed from the water column.

The effect was dramatic. Within just a few years of their introduction, water
clarity in the Great Lakes increased by several meters. In Lake Michigan,
scientists documented that transparency [doubled in some
areas](https://www.usgs.gov/special-topics/great-lakes-restoration-initiative/science/science-topics/zebra-mussels).
The lakes looked healthier. Tourists and boaters could suddenly see down to the
bottom. But that apparent cleanliness was deceptive.

## Ecological sleight of hand

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="2025/when-zebra-mussels-made-the-great-lakes-clean/zebra-mussel.webp" border=false
   alt="Image of zebra mussel"
   cap="A zebra mussel" %}

What zebra mussels really did was restructure the lakes' ecosystems. By
filtering out plankton, they starved the base of the food web. Native fish
species that depended on plankton for food, especially larval fish and
planktivorous species like alewives, saw their [food supply
collapse](https://www.glfc.org/). Commercial fisheries across the basin felt the
effects.

At the same time, the mussels created new problems at the bottom of the lakes.
The clearer water allowed sunlight to penetrate deeper, which encouraged the
growth of bottom-dwelling algae like *Cladophora*. These algae formed thick mats
on the lake floor, supported by the hard substrate created by mussel shells.
Periodically, those mats broke free, washed ashore, and [rotted in stinking
piles](https://www.epa.gov/glwqa/about-nutrients-annex-annex-4). In some places,
these decomposing mats created low-oxygen "dead zones" that suffocated fish.

To make matters worse, zebra mussels do not just filter plankton. They also
filter contaminants. Heavy metals, PCBs, and other pollutants bind to particles
in the water. Mussels accumulate these [toxins in their tissues at high
concentrations](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15093498/). When fish, ducks, or
other predators eat the mussels, those toxins move up the food chain. The result
is an ecosystem that looks cleaner, but is actually more toxic.

Peer-reviewed studies back this up. Researchers have documented how zebra
mussels alter nutrient cycling and redirect energy from open water to the
benthos, the [nearshore phosphorus
shunt](https://cdnsciencepub.com/doi/10.1139/f04-065). Work on Lake Michigan
linked the mussels' filtering to massive blooms of *Cladophora* [once thought
unlikely in deep
water](https://dnr.wisconsin.gov/topic/GreatLakes/Cladophora.html).

## Native mussels and collateral damage

Before zebra mussels arrived, the Great Lakes had a rich community of native
mussels, many belonging to the family Unionidae. These species are long-lived,
some surviving for decades, and play a steady role in ecosystem health. Zebra
mussels nearly wiped them out. Because they attach themselves indiscriminately,
they smother native mussels under layers of shells, preventing them from opening
and feeding. By the mid-1990s, biologists reported that [native mussel
populations had collapsed](https://pubs.usgs.gov/publication/70034793) across
much of the Great Lakes basin.

This was not just a loss of biodiversity for its own sake. Native mussels were
better adapted to local conditions and had co-evolved with fish hosts that
carried their larvae. Losing them meant a permanent restructuring of the lakes'
ecology, replacing long-lived specialists with aggressive newcomers.

The ecological story was only part of the zebra mussel invasion. The other part
was economic. Their tendency to clog pipes made them a nightmare for water
treatment plants, power plants, and industries that relied on lake water.
Estimates in the 1990s put the cost to the U.S. in the hundreds of millions of
dollars per year [in maintenance and lost
efficiency](https://www.fws.gov/species/zebra-mussel-dreissena-polymorpha).
Divers had to scrape them out of intake pipes. Chemicals had to be added to keep
them from colonizing critical infrastructure. Boat owners had to pay for hull
cleanings.

## Quagga mussels join the party

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="2025/when-zebra-mussels-made-the-great-lakes-clean/quagga-mussel.webp" border=false
   alt="Image of quagga mussel with ruler"
   cap="The closely related quagga mussel" %}

As if zebra mussels were not enough, their cousin, the quagga mussel
(*[Dreissena rostriformis
bugensis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quagga_mussel)*), showed up in the
1990s. Quagga mussels are similar but can live in deeper, colder waters. While
zebra mussels dominate nearshore areas, quaggas spread across the deep lake
beds. By the 2000s, [quagga mussels had largely displaced zebra
mussels](https://invasivemusselcollaborative.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/NOAA-QM-Fact-Sheet.pdf)
in many areas of the Great Lakes.

Together, the two species created an invasive filter-feeding machine that
fundamentally changed the lakes' ecology. Scientists now estimate that nearly
all of the [plankton produced in some lakes passes through the guts of mussels
before anything else can eat
it](https://www.usgs.gov/publications/quagga-and-zebra-mussels-biology-impacts-and-control).
This "benthification" of energy, redirecting nutrients from the open water to
the lake bottom, has reshaped the food web from top to bottom.

## The paradox of clarity

So did zebra mussels clean the Great Lakes? The answer depends on what you mean
by "clean."

If clean means "clear," then yes. The lakes look better. Sunlight penetrates
deeper. Scuba divers and recreational boaters marvel at how far they can see.

But if clean means "healthy," then the answer is no. The lakes are less
productive in terms of supporting fish. They are more prone to nuisance algal
growth. They recycle pollutants into the food chain. And they have lost much of
their native mussel biodiversity. The mussels did not return the lakes to a
pristine state; they engineered an entirely new system, one that favors them at
the expense of almost everything else.

## Fighting back, or not

Managing zebra mussels has proved nearly impossible. Once they are established
in a body of water, eradication is not feasible. Some local lakes and reservoirs
have tried chemical treatments, but these [often kill native species as
well](https://doi.org/10.1201/EBK1439804419). Prevention has become the main
strategy: educating boaters to [clean, drain, and
dry](https://www.usgs.gov/faqs/how-can-spread-zebra-mussels-be-prevented) their
equipment, enforcing ballast water management on ships, and monitoring new
waterways for early invasions.

The Great Lakes themselves are beyond eradication. Zebra and quagga mussels are
permanent residents. Instead, management has shifted toward mitigating their
effects. For example, [scientists are studying ways to control *Cladophora*
blooms](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-120213-091928), restore native
mussel populations in protected areas, and monitor toxin accumulation in food
webs.

## A lesson in appearances

The story of zebra mussels is a cautionary tale in environmental management.
Water that looks clean may be ecologically impoverished. Clarity is not the same
as health. A lake can be clear because it is full of filter-feeding invaders,
just as a forest can look green but be dominated by invasive plants that choke
out biodiversity.

When the lakes "cleaned up" in the 1990s, it was tempting to believe that
decades of environmental regulation and investment had paid off. In truth, those
efforts did help reduce industrial pollution and sewage inputs. But the sudden
transformation was mostly due to a tiny mussel with a knack for multiplying and
an appetite for plankton.

Today, zebra mussels remain one of the most infamous invasive species in North
America. Their story is not one of ecological redemption, but of ecological
re-engineering. The Great Lakes look clearer, but they are also fundamentally
different ecosystems than they were before.

That is the paradox: sometimes, "clean" is not the same as "good."
