---
title: "Context Degradation Syndrome: When Large Language Models Lose the Plot"
date: 2024-11-26
author: k3jph
layout: post
permalink: /2024/11/26/context-degradation-syndrome-when-large-language-models-lose-the-plot
featured_image: /assets/img/2024/context-degradation-syndrome-when-large-language-models-lose-the-plot.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - large language models
  - artificial intelligence
---

Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized the way we interact
with technology. Tools like [ChatGPT](https://openai.com/chatgpt),
[Bard](https://bard.google.com/), and
[Claude](https://www.anthropic.com/index/claude) can draft emails,
summarize dense reports, generate code, and even brainstorm creative
ideas. Their versatility and ability to process natural language have
made them indispensable for countless tasks, from business communication
to creative writing.

However, these models are not without their quirks. If you have spent
enough time chatting with one, you may have noticed a curious
phenomenon: after many exchanges--perhaps a hundred or more--the
conversation seems to unravel. Responses become repetitive, lose focus,
or miss key details. This shift can feel like the model is "losing the
plot," as once-sharp exchanges descend into frustrating incoherence.

This behavior is not just frustrating; it is fascinating. It reveals the
underlying mechanics and limitations of how LLMs process and retain
information. To give it a name, let us call this phenomenon **Context
Degradation Syndrome (CDS)**.

## What Is CDS?

**Context Degradation Syndrome (CDS)** refers to the gradual breakdown
in coherence and utility that occurs during long-running conversations
with large language models (LLMs). This issue is not unique to ChatGPT;
it can affect any AI system that relies on a finite **context window**.
Once the conversation exceeds this limit, the model can no longer
"remember" earlier exchanges in a meaningful way, leading to gaps,
inconsistencies, and, occasionally, outright nonsense.

Importantly, CDS is not a bug. It is an inherent limitation of the
underlying architecture of most LLMs, such as [OpenAI's
GPT-4](https://openai.com/research/gpt-4), Bard, Claude, and others.
These models do not have true memory. Instead, they operate within a
sliding window of recent text (or tokens) to generate responses. Any
content that falls outside this window effectively vanishes, as though
it never existed in the conversation.

## Why Does CDS Happen?

CDS arises from several technical and practical factors that intersect
in long conversations. These factors reveal not only the limitations of
LLMs but also the design trade-offs that influence how they operate.

### Context Window Limitations

All LLMs function within a fixed **context window** that determines how
much recent text they can "remember" at any given time. This context
window is measured in tokens--units of text that include both words and
punctuation. For example, GPT-4 supports a context window of
approximately 8,000 to 32,000 tokens, depending on the version, while
Claude can manage up to 100,000 tokens. However, no current model
supports indefinite memory. 

Once a conversation exceeds the token limit, earlier exchanges are
dropped. Crucially, this does not discriminate between trivia and
critical context; both are erased, even if highly relevant to the
discussion. Imagine having a detailed conversation with someone, only
for them to forget everything you said earlier once you reached a word
limit--it can be disorienting and frustrating.

{% include figure.html width="12" placement="center"
   image="/2024/context-degradation-syndrome-when-large-language-models-lose-the-plot/context-window-sequence-diagram.webp"
   alt="A sequence diagram illustrating the concept of a context window
   in large language models. It shows four participants: 'Older Context'
   (representing forgotten information), 'Active Context Window' (the
   part currently processed, with a limit of tokens), 'New Context'
   (recent parts of the conversation entering the window), and 'LLM
   Processing' (the model generating responses). The diagram highlights
   the flow of tokens, where older tokens are pushed out as new tokens
   enter, emphasizing how the active window shifts and forgotten
   information becomes inaccessible."  cap="Visualization of Context
   Windows" %} 

### Accumulation of Noise

As conversations lengthen, small misinterpretations or irrelevant
details can compound over time. Each response builds upon the last,
meaning even minor misunderstandings early on can ripple into larger
issues later. This "snowball effect" can make responses feel
increasingly disjointed or irrelevant, contributing to the sense that
the AI has "lost the plot."

For example, if an LLM misinterprets a technical term in the 20th
exchange, that misunderstanding may subtly influence all subsequent
responses, leading to increasingly erroneous conclusions.

### Cognitive Overload (for the AI)

Unlike humans, who can reflect, reorganize thoughts, and take a step
back when faced with complexity, LLMs process text sequentially and in
isolation. They rely entirely on the information within their context
window to generate each response. This makes them highly efficient at
handling discrete, short tasks but leaves them vulnerable in long,
intricate conversations where coherence across exchanges is crucial. 

The lack of an overarching "big picture" understanding means that
logical errors or contradictions can creep in as the conversation
meanders or grows in complexity.

### Variable Training Objectives

LLMs are trained with different objectives, which can influence how they
handle extended discussions. For instance:

- **ChatGPT** is fine-tuned for conversational nuance, making it
  effective for maintaining a natural flow but potentially prone to
  introducing tangents or irrelevant details in lengthy exchanges.
- **Bard** prioritizes search-like precision, which can result in sharp,
  factual answers but struggles when continuity or depth is needed.
- **Claude** emphasizes interpretive and ethical reasoning, which may
  help in some complex discussions but could also amplify noise if the
  conversation becomes unfocused.

These design differences mean that the experience of CDS can vary across
models, with some amplifying certain symptoms depending on their
specific strengths and weaknesses.

## Examples of CDS in Action

The effects of CDS are not abstract; they manifest in specific,
recognizable ways during long interactions with LLMs.
Below are some common symptoms that users encounter:

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="/2024/context-degradation-syndrome-when-large-language-models-lose-the-plot/steps-in-cds.webp"
   alt="A flowchart illustrating how Context Degradation Syndrome (CDS)
   progresses in large language models during extended conversations.
   The flowchart includes four stages: Stage 1, represented in green,
   shows 'Detailed, Coherent Responses'; Stage 2, in yellow, indicates
   'Repetition and Minor Errors'; Stage 3, in red, highlights
   'Forgetting Key Details' and resulting 'Inconsistencies and
   Contradictions'; and Stage 4, in gray, depicts 'Over-Simplified or
   Vague Responses.' The transitions between stages represent the
   gradual degradation of conversational quality as the dialogue
   continues." cap="Steps in Context Degradation Syndrome" %}

### Repetitive Responses

One of the most noticeable signs of CDS is when the model begins cycling
back to the same points, even after the conversation has progressed. For
example, you might ask for a nuanced explanation of a topic, but the
model repeatedly summarizes basic information you already covered
earlier. This repetition can feel like the AI is stuck in a loop, unable
to integrate new context effectively.

### Forgetting Established Facts

Another hallmark of CDS is the model's tendency to forget key details
established earlier in the discussion. This can lead to:

- Contradictory answers: For instance, if you establish that a
  hypothetical scenario involves a specific constraint, the model may
  later ignore or directly contradict that constraint.
- Irrelevant responses: The AI might provide answers that no longer
  align with the original premise of the conversation.

This behavior is particularly problematic in technical or creative
projects where consistency is crucial.

### Over-simplification or Vagueness

As the conversation grows longer, responses can become increasingly
generic or vague. Early exchanges may have been rich in detail and
nuance, but later responses often feel like shallow summaries or overly
broad generalizations. For example:

- A detailed discussion about historical events might devolve into
  generic statements like "This had a significant impact on history."
- Technical questions may receive answers that avoid specifics, even if
  those specifics were addressed earlier.

This over-simplification can make the conversation feel less engaging
and productive over time.

## Managing CDS: Practical Strategies

While CDS can be frustrating, there are several effective strategies to
mitigate its effects and keep your conversations productive. By adapting
your approach, you can maintain coherence and maximize the utility of
LLMs.

<div class="col-md-5 p-5 pull-right item">
  <div class="row">
    <!-- Card 0: Summarize Key Points -->
    <div class="col-12">
      <div class="card h-100 p-4 m-2" style="background-color: #FFFDD0;">
        <div class="card-body">
          <h3 class="card-title text-center">Managing CDS</h3>
          <p class="card-text m-2">
            <i class="fa-regular fa-square-check"></i>&nbsp;<strong>Summarize Key Points</strong><br/>
            Periodically condense key details to help the LLM retain critical context
          </p>
          <p class="card-text m-2">
            <i class="fa-regular fa-square-check"></i>&nbsp;<strong>Use External Notes</strong><br/>
            Keep a separate document for critical information and refer to it as needed
          </p>
          <p class="card-text m-2">
            <i class="fa-regular fa-square-check"></i>&nbsp;<strong>Start Fresh Threads</strong><br/>
            Break long conversations into focused segments for better clarity
          </p>
          <p class="card-text m-2">
            <i class="fa-regular fa-square-check"></i>&nbsp;<strong>Choose the Right Model</strong><br/>
            Select LLMs optimized for long contexts to reduce the effects of CDS
          </p>
          <p class="card-text m-2">
            <i class="fa-regular fa-square-check"></i>&nbsp;<strong>Be Precise</strong><br/>
            Use clear, targeted prompts to reduce ambiguity and focus the model
          </p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

### Summarize and Refresh

Periodically summarizing key points for the model acts as a manual
refresh. By condensing the critical elements of your discussion into a
concise recap, you help the LLM stay focused on what matters most. For
example:

- Before diving into new details, provide a summary like, "Here is what
  we have established so far: X, Y, and Z."
- Use summaries to refocus the conversation if the model begins to drift
  or repeat itself.

This technique is particularly helpful in lengthy, multi-part
discussions.

### Use External Notes

Keep a separate document or notes file to track important details from
your conversation. You can reference these notes yourself or paste
relevant excerpts back into the chat to reintroduce context that may
have been lost. This approach is especially useful for:

- Technical discussions involving intricate details or ongoing projects.
- Creative writing tasks where continuity is essential.

By externalizing the memory burden, you free the LLM to focus on the
immediate context while preserving the integrity of your discussion.

### Start New Threads

When a conversation becomes unwieldy or the model's responses degrade
significantly, starting a fresh thread can help. Reference the key
points from the earlier discussion in the new thread to restore
continuity. For example:

- "In our last discussion, we covered X, Y, and Z. Let us pick up where
  we left off."

Breaking up discussions into shorter, focused sessions improves
coherence and reduces the noise that accumulates over time.

### Choose the Right Model

Not all LLMs handle long contexts equally well. If you anticipate a
lengthy or complex discussion, select a model optimized for extended
interactions. For example:

- Claude, developed by Anthropic, is designed with a context window of
  up to 100,000 tokens, making it ideal for long-running exchanges.
- GPT-4's larger context variants also perform better in handling
  intricate, multi-layered conversations.

Choosing a model suited to your needs can significantly reduce the risk
of encountering CDS symptoms.

### Be Precise

Use clear, targeted prompts to minimize ambiguity and help the model
focus on what is most relevant. Avoid overly broad or open-ended
questions that can lead the conversation astray. Instead:

- Define the scope of your query: "Within the context of X, how would Y
  apply?"
- Specify desired output formats or levels of detail: "Please summarize
  this in 200 words."

Precision not only keeps the conversation on track but also reduces the
likelihood of noise accumulating over time.

## The Bigger Picture: What CDS Tells Us About LLMs

CDS is more than a technical inconvenience--it reveals fundamental
trade-offs in the design of LLMs. These systems excel at processing
recent text, leveraging vast amounts of data to generate coherent and
contextually appropriate responses. However, they are not equipped for
genuine long-term memory. This limitation underscores a broader
challenge in AI development: balancing flexibility, efficiency, and
coherence within finite computational resources.

CDS highlights the inherent constraints of current LLM architectures,
particularly their reliance on context windows. These windows are
optimized to manage immediate conversational needs but lack mechanisms
for retaining critical details across extended exchanges. This trade-off
reflects the complexity of designing systems that can handle both
short-term precision and long-term context seamlessly.

Interestingly, CDS also mirrors aspects of human communication. Just as
people can forget details or lose focus during sprawling conversations,
LLMs struggle to maintain coherence as discussions grow in length and
complexity. This parallel reminds us that even human communication
requires resets, summaries, and deliberate efforts to regain clarity.
Recognizing this similarity can help us adjust our expectations of LLMs
and work with them more effectively.

## Looking Ahead

The limitations of CDS are not insurmountable. As AI research continues
to evolve, future models may overcome these challenges through
innovations in architecture and memory management. Some promising areas
of development include:

- **Dynamic Memory Management**: Systems that can selectively retain and
  recall key details across sessions without overwhelming the processing
  window. This could mimic a human-like ability to focus on relevant
  information while filtering out noise.
- **Improved Summarization Tools**: Advanced algorithms could help LLMs
  create and refer back to concise, high-quality summaries of past
  interactions, enhancing continuity over long discussions.
- **Hybrid Memory Systems**: Combining short-term and long-term memory
  mechanisms might enable models to integrate immediate context with
  persistent knowledge from earlier interactions.
- **Scaling Context Windows**: Expanding context windows, as seen in
  models like Claude, will continue to reduce the frequency of context
  loss and improve coherence in extended exchanges.

These advancements could transform how LLMs handle extended
interactions, making them more adaptable and effective for tasks that
require sustained focus and continuity. 

Until these innovations are widely implemented, understanding and
adapting to the quirks of CDS remains critical. By employing strategies
like summarization, external notes, and precise prompts, we can navigate
the limitations of current LLMs while benefiting from their remarkable
capabilities. The future of AI is bright, but even today, with the right
approach, these tools can offer tremendous value.

---

Understanding CDS is not just about managing frustration--it is about
appreciating the intricacies of how LLMs work and using that knowledge
to collaborate with them more effectively. The more we adapt, the more
we can unlock their full potential.
