---
title: "On the Royal Badges"
date: 2024-12-10
author: k3jph
layout: post
permalink: /2024/12/10/on-the-royal-badges
featured_image: /assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges.webp
credits: >-
  Image of the Royal badges aside the Royal arms carved in stone at
  King's College, Cambridge, England, by [John Seb
  Barber](https://flickr.com/photos/69875617@N00/4118345532).  Images of
  badges by [Sodacan](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Sodacan).
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - heraldry
  - royal arms
  - heraldic badges
  - British monarchy
  - medieval history
  - United Kingdom
---

Royal badges have long been a way for English and British monarchs to
stamp their identity on history--literally. These emblems, unlike the
more formal coat of arms, were personal markers of power, ambition, and,
occasionally, whimsy. They did not just represent the crown as an
institution; they reflected the character and priorities of the monarch
themselves. Badges adorned coins, decorated buildings, and marked
livery, serving as a visual shorthand for royal authority and ideals.
Think of them as the medieval equivalent of a personal brand: part
symbolism, part strategy, and all about showing who is in charge.
Monarchs used these symbols to balance their unique identities with the
monarchy's broader heraldic traditions, blending personal flair with
timeless authority.

## Major Royal Badges

The royal badges of English and British monarchs have served as deeply
personal symbols, reflecting the values, alliances, or political
aspirations of the reigning king or queen. Unlike the formal coat of
arms, which adhered to strict heraldic rules and represented the broader
institution of the monarchy, badges were far more flexible and
individualized. Monarchs often employed multiple badges for different
contexts—whether to emphasize dynastic claims, signal alliances, or
project personal virtues. This flexibility allowed each monarch to
tailor their symbols to specific needs while providing a unique window
into their legacy. In this exploration, we focus on the primary badges
that most vividly defined their reigns.

### The Plantagenets and the Planta genista

<div class="item col-md-3 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Planta_genista_Badge_of_the_Plantagenets.svg" alt="Planta genista Badge of the Plantagenets" />
      <figcaption class="images-caption">Planta genista Badge of the Plantagenets</figcaption>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

Henry II is traditionally associated with the [broom plant](https://www.nps.gov/articles/scotch-broom.htm), Planta
genista, a symbol that holds particular significance for his dynasty.
This connection is believed to be the origin of the [Plantagenet name](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/archaeologia/article/abs/iii-observations-on-the-heraldic-devices-discovered-on-the-effigies-of-richard-the-second-and-his-queen-in-westminster-abbey-and-upon-the-mode-in-which-those-ornaments-were-executed-including-some-remarks-on-the-surname-plantagenet-and-on-the-ostrich-feathers-of-the-prince-of-wales-by-john-gough-nichols-esq-fsa/0757E5DF0326525C08A75BCBB0B4A109),
marking the foundation of one of the most enduring royal houses in
English history. The broom plant symbolized resilience, vitality, and
strength—qualities that Henry sought to project as he navigated the
complexities of consolidating power across England and expanding his
control into French territories.

The broom plant did not remain exclusive to Henry II. It continued to be
used as a badge by his successors, serving as a unifying symbol for the
Plantagenet dynasty up to the reign of Edward III. Each king imbued the
badge with their own interpretation while retaining its underlying
message of resilience and dynastic strength. Edward III, in particular,
capitalized on the Plantagenet legacy symbolized by the broom plant as
he pursued [his ambitions on the French
throne](http://www.snsbi.org.uk/Nomina_articles/Nomina_30_Plant.pdf),
ensuring the badge's significance endured through generations.

### Other Plantagenet Badges

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
      <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Star_and_Crescent_Badge.svg" alt="Star and Crescent Badge" />
      <figcaption class="images-caption">Star and Crescent Badge</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
      <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Golden_Rose_Badge.svg" alt="The Golden Rose Badge" />
      <figcaption class="images-caption">The Golden Rose Badge</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

The Plantagenet kings employed a variety of badges that reflected their
individual ambitions and the broader context of their reigns. Richard I,
known for his crusading fervor, adopted the crescent and star as his
personal badge. These symbols, often associated with the East and the
Islamic world, underscored Richard's identity as a warrior king and his
role in the Third Crusade. For Richard, [the crescent and star were
powerful emblems](https://www.proquest.com/docview/613723737) of his
commitment to Christendom and his reputation as a defender of the faith.
His brother and successor, King John, continued to use the crescent and
star, though its significance waned after John's reign.

Edward I introduced the [golden rose as a
badge](https://www.jstor.org/stable/41374693), marking the first
appearance of the rose motif in English royal heraldry. The golden rose
symbolized beauty, divine favor, and Edward's vision of a unified realm,
particularly during his campaigns to assert English dominance in Wales
and Scotland. Though the badge fell out of use under his successor,
Edward II, it was revived by Edward III, who reconnected the rose to its
earlier legacy. The rose motif would go on to become a central symbol in
English heraldry, reappearing prominently during the Wars of the Roses
and beyond.

### The Ostrich Feather and Its Long Legacy

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-4">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Ostrich_Feather_Badge.svg" alt="Ostrich feather of Richard II" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Ostrich feather of Richard II</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-4">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Ostrich_Feather_Badge_of_Henry_IV.svg" alt="Ostrich feather of Henry IV" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Ostrich feather of Henry IV</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-4">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Silver_Feather_Badge.svg" alt="Ostrich feather of Henry V" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Ostrich feather of Henry V</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

The ostrich feather first emerged as a royal badge during the reign of
Richard II, [a monarch known for his artistic sensibilities and penchant
for symbolic
expression](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/978-1-349-27580-9_6.pdf).
Richard adopted the ostrich feather as a personal emblem, often depicted
as a plume or cluster of feathers, to convey ideals of nobility, purity,
and chivalric virtue. The feather's graceful form and exotic origin
reflected Richard's cultivated image as a sophisticated and enlightened
ruler.

The ostrich feather's symbolic life did not end with Richard II. Though
it fell out of favor following his deposition, the badge resurfaced in
later heraldic traditions, particularly within the House of Lancaster
and the royal princes of England. Perhaps the most famous iteration is
the badge of the Prince of Wales, featuring [three white ostrich
feathers](https://www.proquest.com/intermediateredirectforezproxy)
encircled by a coronet and accompanied by the motto "Ich Dien" (I
Serve). While the precise origins of this later usage are debated, the
adoption of the feather as a princely badge reflects its enduring
resonance as a symbol of royal virtue and service.

Henry IV and his son, Henry V, [also employed badges such as the
antelope and the
swan](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00681288.1851.11886940),
both of which symbolized chivalric values, loyalty, and purity. The
white swan, associated with the de Bohun family--an ancestral line of
Henry IV--represented noble lineage and unwavering loyalty. The
antelope, often depicted as a mythical creature, conveyed grace and
strength. These badges underscored the Lancastrian claim to the throne
through noble inheritance, while also highlighting the chivalric ideals
that defined both monarchs' reigns.  The Lancasters may be best known
for the red rose, however.

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-4">
      <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Red_Rose_Badge_of_Lancaster.svg" alt="The red rose of Lancaster" />
      <figcaption class="images-caption">The red rose of Lancaster</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-4">
      <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/White_Rose_Badge_of_York.svg" alt="The white rose of York" />
      <figcaption class="images-caption">The white rose of York</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-4">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Tudor_Rose.svg" alt="The Tudor Rose" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The Tudor Rose</figcaption>
    </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

### The Red Rose of Lancaster

The red rose of Lancaster stands as one of the most enduring and
recognizable symbols in English history, [representing the House of
Lancaster](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00681288.1851.11886940)
during its protracted conflict with the House of York in the Wars of the
Roses. Its adoption as a badge is traditionally attributed to Henry IV,
the first Lancastrian king, although its use may have earlier roots
within the family's heraldic tradition. The red rose symbolized loyalty,
courage, and the bloodlines of the Lancastrian dynasty, projecting an
image of strength and legitimacy during a time of dynastic instability.

The red rose of Lancaster was prominently displayed during the reign of
Henry VI, whose turbulent rule saw the height of the Wars of the Roses.
The badge was used not only on battle standards and seals but also in
public displays of loyalty to the Lancastrian cause. Even as Henry VI's
reign faltered and the Yorkists gained power, the red rose retained its
symbolic weight, representing the persistence of Lancastrian claims to
the throne.

### The White Rose of York

The white rose of York, [emblematic of the House of York](https://digitalcommons.library.uab.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1179&context=vulcan), remains another
enduring symbols of English heraldry. Its use as a badge dates back to
the 14th century, where it became closely associated with Edmund of
Langley, the first Duke of York and a younger son of Edward III. The
rose symbolized purity, loyalty, and a divine right to rule, qualities
the Yorkist kings sought to embody and project during their turbulent
bids for the English throne.

The white rose reached its zenith of prominence during the reigns of
Edward IV and Richard III, both Yorkist kings who prominently displayed
the badge to assert their authority. Edward IV's "rose en soleil," a
white rose superimposed on a golden sun, represented a fusion of Yorkist
heritage with divine favor, reinforcing his position as a monarch
blessed by providence. Similarly, Richard III used the white rose
extensively, incorporating it into his banners, coinage, and royal
imagery to solidify his connection to the Yorkist legacy.

### The Tudor Rose

Despite the fall of the Yorkist dynasty at the end of the Wars of the
Roses, the white rose retained its symbolic significance.  The Tudor
dynasty, inaugurated by Henry VII, introduced the [red-and-white Tudor
Rose](https://www.jstor.org/stable/40371437) as a symbol of peace and
unity. This emblem represented the union of the houses of Lancaster and
York following the Wars of the Roses. Henry VII used the Tudor Rose to
signal a new era of reconciliation and stability, seeking to heal the
divisions caused by decades of civil conflict. The Tudors also adopted
the [portcullis as a badge](https://www.proquest.com/docview/6680634),
which symbolized security and the monarchy's strength.  Originating as a
Beaufort symbol--connected to Henry VII's maternal lineage--the
portcullis reinforced the image of a fortified monarchy dedicated to
providing stability to England.

### The House of Stuart: Representing a United Kingdom

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Tudor_Rose_(Tudor_Heraldry).svg" alt="Crowned Tudor Rose" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Crowned Tudor Rose</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Thistle_Royal_Badge_of_Scotland.svg" alt="Crowned Thistle" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Crowned Thistle</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
     <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Crowned_Fleur_de_lys_(Tudor_Crown).svg" alt="Crowned Fleur-de-lys" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Crowned <emph>Fleur-de-lys</emph></figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Crowned_Harp_(Tudor_Crown).svg" alt="Crowned Harp" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Crowned Harp</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

When James I ascended to the English throne in 1603, he sought to
symbolize the unity of his newly combined kingdoms. The heraldic badges
of the House of Stuart reflect the complex territorial claims and
aspirations of a monarchy presiding over a composite realm. These
emblems symbolized the unity and sovereignty of England, Scotland,
Ireland, and France, underscoring the Stuarts' ambitions for a cohesive
British identity. Notably absent, however, was a badge representing
Wales, a striking omission that speaks to the evolving but incomplete
nature of British symbolism during this period.

The Tudor rose, a combination of the red rose of Lancaster and the white
rose of York, remained the emblem for England under the Stuarts.
Depicted as a red rose (Rose Gules) with a white rose (Rose Argent)
superimposed and royally crowned, the badge symbolized the enduring
legacy of Tudor reconciliation. By retaining this emblem, the Stuarts
sought to project continuity and stability within England, despite their
Scottish origins.

The thistle, depicted as a slip and flower (Proper) and crowned,
represented Scotland and was emblematic of the Stuart dynasty's
heritage. As native Scots, the Stuarts elevated the thistle to a
prominent position, reflecting both their ancestral pride and their
efforts to integrate Scotland into the broader monarchy. The thistle's
symbolism of resilience and unity resonated deeply with the Stuart
monarchs, especially in the wake of James VI of Scotland's ascension to
the English throne as James I, uniting the crowns of England and
Scotland.

The fleur-de-lis (Or, crowned) symbolized the English monarchy's claim
to the French throne, a legacy dating back to Edward III's assertion of
this right in 1340. Although the claim was largely symbolic by the
Stuart period, the fleur-de-lis remained an integral part of royal
heraldry, reflecting the historic ambitions of English monarchs on the
European stage. Its inclusion in the Stuart badges signaled a continued,
if nominal, assertion of England's influence abroad. 

The harp (Or, stringed Argent, and crowned) represented Ireland, a badge
steeped in both cultural and political significance. As a long-standing
symbol of Irish identity, the harp conveyed the monarchy's role as the
sovereign authority over Ireland, though Stuart rule in Ireland faced
persistent challenges. The harp's royal crown reinforced the notion of
Ireland's integration into the composite monarchy, despite the
underlying tensions and divisions within the Irish realm. 

<div class="item col-md-3 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Union_of_the_Crowns_Royal_Badge.svg" alt="Badge of the Union of the Crowns" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Badge of the Union of the Crowns</figcaption>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

Notably, Wales was absent from this collection of heraldic symbols.
Since the incorporation of Wales into the English Crown by the Laws in
Wales Acts of 1535 and 1542, Welsh identity had been subsumed under the
broader representation of England in heraldic tradition. This absence
highlights a significant gap in the Stuarts' symbolic recognition of the
territories they governed. Despite Wales's integral role within the
kingdom, its distinct cultural and historical identity was not
explicitly acknowledged in the royal badges of the Stuart period.

The Union of the Crowns in 1603 was symbolized by a badge combining the
Tudor rose of England and the thistle of Scotland, crowned to signify
their unity under James VI and I. This emblem represented the merging of
two distinct national identities under the Stuart monarchy, projecting a
vision of harmony and cooperation. Though the badge conveyed aspirations
for unity, the full political union of England and Scotland would not be
realized until the Acts of Union in 1707, highlighting the evolving
nature of this early symbol of British integration.

### George I to Elizabeth II

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-4">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Royal_Badge_of_Wales_(1953).svg" alt="1801 Badge of Wales with 1953 Augmentation" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">1801 Badge of Wales with 1953 Augmentation</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-4">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Royal_Badge_of_Wales.svg" alt="2008 Royal Badge of Wales" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">2008 Royal Badge of Wales</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-4">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/on-the-royal-badges/Badge_of_the_House_of_Windsor.svg" alt="Badge of the House of Windsor" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">Badge of the House of Windsor</figcaption>
        </div>        
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

With the accession of George I, the first Hanoverian monarch, the royal
approach to symbolism shifted significantly. The House of Hanover
generally favored the use of the [Royal
Cipher](https://archive.org/details/heraldryancientm00boutrich/page/308/mode/2up)
over the traditional badges employed by earlier monarchs. This choice
reflected the Hanoverians' preference for a unified and streamlined
representation of royal authority. However, earlier heraldic badges,
such as the white horse of Hanover, continued to appear in certain
contexts, particularly when emphasizing George's German ancestry and
Hanoverian lineage.

Subsequent monarchs, especially those of the House of Windsor,
occasionally revived earlier symbols while embracing broader British
emblems such as the Tudor Rose, the Irish shamrock, and the Scottish
thistle. These badges symbolized continuity and unity across the United
Kingdom and the Commonwealth. In the modern era, Queen Elizabeth II
introduced new badges to reflect evolving royal symbolism, including a
[new Royal badge for
Wales](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14780038.2022.2060903)
that acknowledged its distinct cultural identity, as well as reviving an
earlier Welsh badge.  However, while these badges offered some
representation, Welsh identity has historically focused on achieving
representation in the Royal Coat of Arms, a goal that remains
unrealized. George VI adopted a specific badge for [the House of
Windsor](https://www.royalmint.com/royalty/royal-residences/house-of-windsor/),
reinforcing the dynasty's unique identity within the monarchy.
Together, these symbols demonstrated the enduring adaptability of royal
heraldry in balancing tradition with inclusion.

## Interpretation and Significance of Badges

The badges chosen by English and British monarchs carry profound
dynastic, personal, and political significance. These symbols served as
more than mere decoration; they were carefully crafted tools of
communication, projecting messages about the monarch's legitimacy,
values, and aspirations. Through their badges, monarchs conveyed
continuity and stability while adapting to the evolving political and
cultural landscape.

### Dynastic Significance

Royal badges often symbolized unity and continuity within the monarchy,
especially during periods of political turmoil or transition. One of the
most iconic examples is the Tudor Rose, introduced by Henry VII. This
emblem, created by merging the red rose of Lancaster and the white rose
of York, represented peace and reconciliation after the Wars of the
Roses. The Tudor Rose was not just a badge of personal triumph; it
became a national symbol, reinforcing the legitimacy of the Tudor
dynasty and fostering loyalty and unity among a fractured populace.

Other badges carried similar dynastic weight. The broom plant of the
Plantagenets, introduced by Henry II, symbolized resilience and
strength, qualities critical to establishing one of England's
longest-ruling houses. The thistle of the Stuart dynasty emphasized
Scotland's central role within the United Kingdom under their rule,
signaling a new era of dynastic unity. These badges served to anchor
each royal house within the broader historical narrative of English and
British monarchy, fostering a sense of lineage and permanence.

### Personal and Political Aspirations

Beyond dynastic symbolism, royal badges were powerful vehicles for
personal expression and political messaging. They allowed monarchs to
shape their public personas and communicate their values directly to
their subjects. For example, Richard I's crescent and star underscored
his crusading zeal and commitment to defending Christendom, reinforcing
his image as a warrior king. Similarly, Edward III's "sun in splendor"
evoked divine favor and enlightenment, portraying him as a ruler blessed
by providence and destined for greatness.

These badges were often used to emphasize alliances and aspirations.
Henry IV and Henry V employed the swan and antelope to reflect chivalric
ideals and noble lineage, while the Tudor Rose emphasized Henry VII's
political goal of national unity. By adopting badges that resonated with
their subjects, monarchs strengthened their connection to the people and
legitimized their authority. These symbols were not static; they adapted
to reflect the political ambitions and cultural contexts of their times.

### The Evolving Role of Badges

As political landscapes shifted, the role of royal badges evolved,
reflecting changes in governance and public expectations. During the
Hanoverian period, badges were largely supplanted by the Royal Cipher,
yet earlier symbols like the white horse of Hanover were used
selectively to emphasize dynastic heritage. In the modern era, Queen
Elizabeth II revitalized the use of badges to reflect the diversity and
unity of the United Kingdom, introducing badges for Wales and the House
of Windsor. This evolution illustrates the enduring adaptability of
royal badges, maintaining their relevance while respecting historical
traditions.  Conclusion

Through their badges, monarchs articulated their vision for the realm,
consolidated their power, and reinforced their role as both symbols of
stability and agents of change. Whether reflecting dynastic legitimacy,
personal virtue, or political strategy, these emblems have served as
dynamic tools for expressing identity and unifying the nation, leaving
an indelible mark on the history and culture of the monarchy.
