---
id: what-makes-a-quaker-a-quaker
title: What Makes a Quaker a Quaker
date: 2024-10-03
author: k3jph
layout: post
permalink: /2024/10/03/what-makes-a-quaker-a-quaker
featured_image: /assets/img/2024/what-makes-a-quaker-a-quaker.webp
categories:
- Blog 
tags:
- genealogy
- religion
- Quakerism
- Buddhsim
---

Growing up, I always had a vague understanding of Quakers—mostly tied to
their impact on political and social movements. Recently, though, I
discovered that my mother's family has deep Quaker roots, with numerous
ancestors belonging to this community. This led me to a deeper
exploration: What exactly made them Quakers, beyond a mere mention in
the pages of history? What did they believe, how did they live, and what
has this heritage passed on to me?

## Origins of the Quakers

The Religious Society of Friends, or Quakers, was born during the
mid-17th century in England, a period of intense social and religious
upheaval. [George
Fox](https://www.quakersintheworld.org/quakers-in-action/12/George-Fox),
often considered the founder, felt that the established churches had
strayed from a true relationship with the divine. He emphasized a direct
experience with God—an idea that did not require clergy, rituals, or any
intermediaries. This radical notion led to the formation of a community
that would come to be known as Quakers, a term originally coined in
derision because they would "quake" during moments of spiritual ecstasy.
Over time, however, this term came to be embraced by the Friends
themselves.

At the core of Quakerism is the concept of the ["Inner
Light"](https://www.pym.org/faith-and-practice/experience-and-faith/the-light-within/),
which holds that everyone has within them a divine presence—a spark of
God that does not require a church or a priest to mediate. Instead, each
person can access this Inner Light through personal contemplation,
reflection, and connection. This belief alone was revolutionary in
17th-century England, where the church hierarchy held immense power, and
the idea that each individual could directly commune with God was
considered almost heretical. For my Quaker ancestors, this emphasis on a
direct, personal experience of the divine shaped their worldview, giving
them an intense focus on equality and a deep respect for every human
being.

The practice of worship among Quakers reflects this belief. Traditional
Quaker meetings are held in silence. The community gathers without a
pastor, and anyone moved by the Spirit is free to speak. This form of
worship emphasizes the importance of listening—to God, to oneself, and
to each other. In the quietness of a Quaker meeting, there is a
collective waiting, a spiritual openness that allows the divine presence
to guide the community. This approach stands in stark contrast to the
structured liturgies of other Christian denominations, and I imagine
that the power of this silent, egalitarian space must have left a
profound imprint on my ancestors' understanding of faith and community.

## Quaker Beliefs: SPICES of Life

Quaker beliefs are not only about worship but also about how one lives
in the world. Their values are often described using the acronym SPICES:
[Simplicity, Peace, Integrity, Community, Equality, and
Stewardship](https://www.friendsjournal.org/s-p-i-c-e-s-quaker-testimonies/).
These guiding principles are called "testimonies" because they represent
how Quakers testify to their beliefs through their actions.

Simplicity is perhaps one of the most recognizable aspects of Quaker
life. Historically, this meant living plainly, avoiding excess, and
focusing on what truly mattered. Quakers wore simple clothing, spoke
plainly, and sought to live without unnecessary distractions. This focus
on simplicity extended beyond material goods; it was also about
simplicity of purpose, living a life that remained close to one's
spiritual values. As I explored my family history, I began to see how
this simplicity might have been a thread running through the lives of my
ancestors, encouraging them to value community and spirituality over
material success.

Peace is another fundamental tenet. Quakers are known for their
commitment to nonviolence and have historically been [conscientious
objectors](https://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/christianity/subdivisions/quakers_1.shtml),
choosing imprisonment over military service during times of war. The
Quaker Peace Testimony is not just about avoiding war; it is a
commitment to resolving conflicts peacefully in all aspects of life. In
examining the lives of my ancestors, I wonder how they managed to uphold
this belief in times of conflict, especially when pacifism went against
the prevailing attitudes of society.

Integrity, for Quakers, means being true to oneself and being honest in
all dealings. It means that words and actions align, and it involves a
deep commitment to truth, regardless of the consequences. This
insistence on integrity extended to every area of life, from business
dealings to personal relationships. Quakers were known for their honesty
and fairness, which contributed to their reputation as trustworthy
merchants and bankers.

The emphasis on community is evident in how Quakers organized their
early settlements, particularly in America. Many Quakers came to the
American colonies to escape persecution in England. [William
Penn](https://www.pennsburymanor.org/history/william-penn-and-american-history/),
a prominent Quaker, founded Pennsylvania as a place where Friends and
others could live according to their beliefs without fear of harassment.
Quakers worked together to create supportive communities that helped
those in need, educated their children, and worked for social reforms
that benefited everyone.

The testimony of equality might be one of the most striking of all. From
the beginning, Quakers believed that all people were equal in the eyes
of God. This meant that they actively worked against the institution of
slavery and were among the first to advocate for abolition in America.
Their commitment to equality also meant that women were granted equal
status within the community, and they could speak, lead, and hold
authority in ways that were highly unusual for the time. This
deep-rooted belief in equality resonates with me, especially when I
think about my ancestors living in a society where such views were far
from mainstream.

Finally, stewardship, the care for God's creation, reflects the Quaker
belief that the Earth is a sacred gift and that we are responsible for
taking care of it. This sense of stewardship is reflected in how Quakers
have often been at the forefront of environmental advocacy, seeking to
protect natural resources and live sustainably.

## Quakerism and Buddhism: A Comparative Reflection

One of the fascinating aspects of exploring Quaker beliefs is comparing
them to other spiritual traditions. Given my background in Buddhist
studies, I cannot help but see interesting parallels between Quakerism
and Buddhism and some striking contrasts. Both traditions emphasize a
direct personal experience—Quakers through the Inner Light and Buddhists
through meditation and insight into the nature of reality. In both,
there is an emphasis on simplicity. Quakers practice simplicity to focus
on the divine, while Buddhists value simplicity as a way to reduce
suffering caused by desire and attachment.

The focus on peace is another commonality. The Quaker Peace Testimony
finds its counterpart in the Buddhist principle of
[ahimsa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahimsa), or nonviolence, which is
central to many Buddhist teachings. Both traditions uphold the
importance of not harming others, whether in thought, word, or deed.
This commitment to nonviolence is deeply embedded in both faiths and has
shaped their respective approaches to social justice.

However, there are also important differences. Quakerism is
fundamentally theistic; the belief in a personal God who communicates
with individuals is core to their faith. Buddhism, on the other hand, is
nontheistic. The goal in Buddhism is not to connect with a divine being
but rather to achieve enlightenment, a deep understanding of the nature
of suffering and the path to its cessation. Where Quakers might gather
in silence to listen for God's voice, Buddhists meditate to quiet the
mind and see reality more clearly.

The communal aspect of Quaker worship also differs from Buddhist
practice. Quaker meetings are collective and egalitarian, emphasizing
the shared experience of waiting for divine guidance. While there are
communal aspects to Buddhism, especially in monastic settings,
meditation is often seen as a personal journey toward enlightenment,
even when done in a group. The silence of a Quaker meeting is filled
with the potential for spontaneous revelation, while the silence in
Buddhist meditation is about deep introspection and mental discipline.

Reflecting on these similarities and differences has deepened my
understanding of both traditions. It makes me appreciate the unique
synthesis of values that my Quaker ancestors held—values that also find
echoes in the Buddhist teachings I have studied. Both traditions, in
their own ways, are committed to peace, to the pursuit of truth, and to
living in harmony with the world. They diverge in their cosmologies but
converge in their insistence that each individual has the capacity for
profound insight and transformation.

## A Personal Connection and New Recognition

Learning about my Quaker ancestry has given me a new perspective on the
values that my family may have quietly passed down. The emphasis on
simplicity, honesty, community, and equality feels familiar, like an
inheritance that has shaped how I view the world, even if I was unaware
of its source. In a world that often feels increasingly complicated,
divided, and focused on material success, there is something incredibly
grounding in revisiting these old beliefs. They remind me that, at its
best, spirituality is not about dogma or ritual--it is about how we
live, how we treat others, and how we connect to something greater than
ourselves.

Recently, I have had the honor of becoming a member of the [National
Society Descendants of Early Quakers](/family/nsdeq). This recognition
has given me an opportunity to formally connect with my Quaker heritage
and reflect on how the values of these early Friends have echoed down
through the generations. This lineage, filled with individuals committed
to peace, equality, and community, has shaped not only who I am but also
how I strive to live my life today.

The journey of uncovering my family's Quaker roots has been more than
just a historical exploration; it has been a personal reminder of the
power of faith when lived authentically. It is a legacy of simplicity,
of courage in the face of adversity, and of an enduring commitment to
equality and peace. Understanding these connections has deepened my
respect for my ancestors and inspired me to carry their values forward
in a world that needs them now more than ever.
