---
title: "The Evolution of the Royal Arms"
date: 2024-11-01
author: k3jph
layout: post
permalink: /2024/11/03/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms
featured_image: /assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms.webp
credits: >-
  Image of the Royal banners hanging outside the Chapel of the Order of
  the Thistle at St Giles Cathedral, Edinburgh, by [Steve
  Linley](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Royal_banners_St_Giles_Edinburgh.jpg).
  Images of coats of arms by [Sodacan](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Sodacan).
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - heraldry
  - royal arms
  - British monarchy
  - medieval history
  - England
---

The Royal Coat of Arms in England has a storied history dating back to
the medieval era. Originally developed to project the authority and
identity of the monarchy, the coat of arms became a distinct, powerful
symbol over time, representing both the sovereignty of the English crown
and its territorial ambitions. Heraldry itself--designed as a visual
system to differentiate noble lineages--became a key language for
showcasing the values and aspirations of the English monarchy.

## The Lionheart and the Three Lions of England

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-geoffrey-of-anjou.svg" alt="The arms of Geoffrey of Anjou" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Geoffrey of Anjou</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-richard-lionheart.svg" alt="The arms of Richard I" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Richard I</figcaption>        
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>
  
Richard I, famously known as Richard the Lionheart, introduced one of
the most enduring symbols in English heraldry: the three lions passant
guardant on a red field. Heraldically described as:

> Gules, three lions passant guardant in pale Or

this emblem became a powerful representation of courage, royal
authority, and English sovereignty. Richard adopted the three-lion
design during his reign from 1189 to 1199, likely building upon earlier
English heraldic traditions where single or paired lions appeared. By
uniting the three lions into a single coat of arms, Richard established
a bold, cohesive image of the English crown.

The three lions symbolized Richard's strength and resilience as a
leader, an image that resonated strongly during his role in the Third
Crusade. His portrayal as a warrior-king was essential to his legacy,
both at home and across Europe.

The origins of the three lions likely draw from Anglo-Norman heraldic
traditions, evolving from the symbols used by Richard's father, Henry
II, and grandfather, Geoffrey of Anjou. Both predecessors had employed
lions in their seals and personal heraldry, but Richard's choice to
adopt three may have emphasized the unity and continuity of the
Plantagenet line. Over time, "England's lions" became inseparable from
the monarchy's authority across Europe, underscoring Richard's role as a
crusading king and formidable ruler.

The design has persisted through the centuries, symbolizing not only the
monarch but also the English nation itself. Later dynasties built upon
this heraldic foundation, preserving the three lions passant as a core
element of the royal arms. Today, Richard's legacy as a founding figure
in English royal heraldry endures through this powerful icon, a visual
link from the medieval period to the present day.

### The Influence of French Symbolism

<div class="item col-md-3 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-12">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-edward-iii.svg" alt="The arms of Edward III" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Edward III</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

The addition of French symbolism to the English royal arms began with
Edward III's assertion of a hereditary claim to the French throne
in 1340. Edward, as the grandson of Philip IV of France through his
mother, sought to strengthen his political leverage and consolidate his
authority by incorporating elements of French heraldry. To formalize his
claim, he introduced quartering, blending England's three lions with the
French fleurs-de-lis to create arms described as:

> Quarterly Or and Azure, semée of fleurs-de-lis Or (for France)
> alongside England's three lions

This design not only reinforced his claim to both the English and French
crowns but also projected an image of dual authority, both on the
battlefield and within courtly settings--especially poignant during the
Hundred Years' War that defined his reign.

The use of quartering marked an innovative period for English heraldic
design, symbolizing a sophisticated blend of heraldry and political
ambition. The fleurs-de-lis came to represent the Plantagenet claim to
French lands, with Edward III's arms serving as a clear declaration of
intent to govern both realms. This symbolic choice functioned as a form
of visual propaganda, asserting England's right to French territories
and bolstering Edward's reputation as a continental monarch.

Through the fleurs-de-lis, Edward signaled his determination to defend
his claim with military strength and alliances, crafting an emblem that
rallied his English subjects and supporters across the Channel. The
quartered arms with France remained in use well beyond Edward III's
lifetime, embedding a lasting symbol of the Plantagenet dynasty's claim
to French lands.

<div class="item col-md-3 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="item">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-richard-II.svg" alt="The arms of Richard II" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Richard II</figcaption>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

### Richard II and the Attributed Arms of Edward the Confessor

One notable variation in the royal arms reflecting this influence came
under Richard II. Seeking to convey a mystical union with the revered
King Edward the Confessor, Richard adopted a unique design that impaled
the attributed arms of Edward the Confessor with the royal arms of
England. This impalement visually signified a bond between the sanctity
of Edward's legacy and Richard's own authority, reinforcing his
legitimacy through a divine association. By combining his own heraldic
lions with Edward's symbolic cross and martlets, Richard's arms
illustrated an ideal of sacred kingship—a ruler spiritually linked to
one of England's most sainted monarchs.

### Henry IV's Simplification

<div class="item col-md-3 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-12">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-henry-iv.svg" alt="The arms of Henry IV" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Henry IV</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

Under Henry IV, who reigned from 1399 to 1413, the royal arms underwent
significant changes that reflected both political pragmatism and the
evolving relationship with France. Henry IV, the first king from the
House of Lancaster, sought to establish a distinct identity for his
reign, distancing himself from the symbolic connections his predecessors
had made to Edward the Confessor. To this end, he removed the attributed
arms of Edward the Confessor, which had previously been impaled with the
royal arms of England by Richard II, emphasizing instead his own
Lancastrian authority and the legitimacy of his rule.

One of Henry IV’s most notable modifications to the royal arms was his
decision to reduce the fleurs-de-lis—the emblematic symbol of the French
crown—from a scattered field (or semée) to just three. This change
mirrored the heraldic style of Charles V of France, who had adopted a
similar reduction. By limiting the fleurs-de-lis, Henry not only aligned
his arms with contemporary French heraldic design but also conveyed a
sense of restraint and practicality in England’s claim to the French
throne. This design, with three fleurs-de-lis and England’s three lions
passant guardant, became a lasting symbol of the English monarchy and
would be retained by subsequent rulers, underscoring Henry IV’s lasting
impact on English heraldic tradition.

### Henry VI and the Dual Monarchy

<div class="item col-md-3 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="item mt-4">
        <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-henry-vi.svg" alt="The arms of Henry VI" />
          <figcaption class="content images-caption">The arms of Henry VI</figcaption>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

The Treaty of Troyes, signed in 1420, marked a pivotal moment for the
English monarchy by recognizing Henry V as heir to the French throne
upon the death of Charles VI of France. To solidify this claim, Henry
retained the quartered arms of England and France, underscoring
England's status as a dual monarchy. Although Henry's death in 1422 and
subsequent losses in France under Henry VI diminished English control,
the continued use of the French quarter served as a lasting symbol of
England's assertion of its rights over France.

Henry VI introduced another variation that further highlighted the
French-English connection. As the first English king to be crowned in
France, Henry adopted a design that emphasized the dual monarchy by
impaling the arms of France and England. Uniquely, he placed the French
arms in the dexter position of greater honor, underscoring his position
as the ruler of both realms. This impalement visually presented Henry as
a true dual monarch, symbolizing both English and French sovereignty in
a single emblem. His arms served not only as a mark of his personal
claim but also as a reflection of his ambition to unify England and
France under one crown.

Though English control over French territories gradually waned, later
English monarchs continued to include the *fleurs-de-lis* in their arms,
preserving Edward's assertion as a symbol of England's historic right to
France. This heraldic decision shaped the Plantagenet dynasty's identity
and influenced English royal heraldry for centuries, symbolizing both
resilience and ambition. These variations within the royal arms reveal
the evolving political symbolism employed by the monarchy, reflecting
not only the authority of each ruler but also the ideals they wished to
project through heraldry.

The persistence of French symbols in English heraldry became a hallmark
of Plantagenet and early Tudor tradition, with the fleurs-de-lis
embedded in the English arms even as the practical claim to French lands
weakened.

<div class="item col-md-3 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="item">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-mary-philip.svg" alt="The arms of Mary I and Philip" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Mary I and Philip</figcaption>
      </div>
      <div class="item mt-4">
        <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-mary-philip-milan.svg" alt="The arms of Mary I and Philip with Duchy of Milan" />
          <figcaption class="content images-caption">The arms of Mary I and Philip with Duchy of Milan</figcaption>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

### Mary I and Philip of Spain: A Heraldic Union

In 1554, the marriage of Mary I of England and Philip of Spain brought
about a distinctive change in the royal arms, symbolizing their joint
reign. The arms of Philip were impaled with those of Mary, blending
symbols of both English and Spanish sovereignty. Philip's heraldic
representation was complex, reflecting his rule over multiple
territories:

 * Quarterly: Castile and León,
 * Per pale: Aragon and Aragon-Sicily, with the whole enté en point featuring Granada,
 * In base: A combination of Austria, Burgundy ancient, Burgundy modern,
   and Brabant, with an escutcheon for Flanders and Tyrol in the center.

Though Mary's father, Henry VIII, had adopted the title of King of
Ireland and this was conferred upon Philip as well, their joint arms did
not include the Kingdom of Ireland. Additionally, as sovereigns of
Milan, Mary and Philip included an escutcheon of the Duchy of Milan,
depicting the Biscione—an azure serpent consuming a human on a silver
field—quartered with the Imperial eagle. This unique arrangement
underscored their shared authority while respecting Philip's continental
claims, particularly in Milan, where French territorial disputes shaped
the armorial order.  

### Elizabeth I and the Restoration of the Royal Arms

Following Mary's death in 1558, Elizabeth I ascended the throne and
restored the English arms to their earlier configuration from Henry IV's
time. This restoration marked a return to a purely English
representation, emphasizing Elizabeth's consolidation of authority and
independence from foreign influence. By distancing the monarchy from the
symbols associated with her sister's Spanish marriage, Elizabeth
reinforced her own sovereign identity as the "Virgin Queen," symbolizing
a unified and distinctly English monarchy.

## Union of Crowns

In 1603, James VI of Scotland inherited the English throne upon the
death of Queen Elizabeth I, becoming James I of England. This succession
established a personal union between England and Scotland, a significant
moment in the history of the British Isles known as the Union of the
Crowns. To symbolize this new union, James I introduced a revised royal
coat of arms that quartered the royal arms of England with those of
Scotland. Additionally, the royal arms of Ireland were incorporated to
represent the Kingdom of Ireland, which had been proclaimed a separate
kingdom in 1542.

The new coat of arms featured:

- First and Fourth Quarters: England's three lions passant guardant
- Second Quarter: Scotland's lion rampant
- Third Quarter: Ireland's harp

This design visually represented James's ambition to unify his kingdoms
under one monarchy while acknowledging their distinct identities. The
incorporation of symbols from England, Scotland, and Ireland was a
deliberate move to promote the idea of a united Britain, even though a
formal political union would not occur until the Acts of Union in 1707.

This version of the royal arms remained in use throughout the reigns of
James I and his successors, including Charles I, Charles II, and James
II. It was last used by Queen Anne, making it the final version of the
royal arms of England before being subsumed into the royal arms of Great
Britain following the union with Scotland.

### The Comonarchy of William III and Mary II

The Glorious Revolution of 1688 led to the deposition of James II and
the joint accession of his daughter Mary II and her husband William III
of Orange. As co-monarchs, they faced the unique challenge of
representing their combined sovereignty in heraldry.

In accordance with heraldic custom, their arms were impaled, meaning
they were placed side by side within the same shield. William's arms
occupied the dexter half (the viewer's left but the shield's right),
considered the position of greater honor. William's personal arms were a
combination of the royal arms and an inescutcheon (a small shield)
representing the House of Nassau, his family lineage. His arms can be
described as:

* Azure billetty Or, a lion rampant Or armed and langued Gules

Mary II bore the royal arms undifferenced, reflecting her status as a
reigning queen in her own right. This heraldic arrangement signified
their joint rule while respecting each monarch's individual heritage and
authority.

After Mary II's death in 1694, William III continued to reign alone.
During this period, he used his own arms exclusively until his death in
1702.

<div class="item col-md-12 px-4">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-3">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-james-i.svg" alt="The arms of James I" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of James I</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-3">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-william-mary.svg" alt="The arms of William and Mary" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of William and Mary</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-3">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-william.svg" alt="The arms of William" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of William</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-3">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-anne.svg" alt="The arms of Anne" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Anne</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

### Queen Anne and the Formation of Great Britain

Upon the death of William III, Anne, the younger sister of Mary II,
ascended to the throne. The royal arms returned to the version used
during James I's reign, symbolizing continuity with the earlier Stuart
monarchs. Anne was the last monarch of an independent Kingdom of England
and the first monarch of Great Britain.

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-anne-england.svg" alt="The arms of Anne in England" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Anne in England</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-anne-scotland.svg" alt="The arms of Anne in Scotland" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Anne in Scotland</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

The Acts of Union 1707 were a significant milestone during Anne's reign,
uniting the kingdoms of England and Scotland into a single sovereign
state known as the Kingdom of Great Britain. This political union
necessitated a redesign of the royal arms to reflect the new reality.

The updated coat of arms featured:

- First and Fourth Quarters: The impaled arms of England and Scotland,
  symbolizing their union
- Second Quarter: The royal arms of France, reflecting the continued
  (though increasingly symbolic) claim to the French throne
- Third Quarter: The harp of Ireland

This new configuration emphasized the unity between England and Scotland
while maintaining historical claims and representations. The impalement
of England and Scotland in the first and fourth quarters visually
reinforced the equal status of the two kingdoms within the union.

### George I and the Hanoverian Influence

Following Queen Anne's death in 1714 without surviving heirs, the throne
passed to George I, Elector of Hanover, under the provisions of the Act
of Settlement 1701. This marked the beginning of the Hanoverian dynasty
in Britain.

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-george-england.svg" alt="The arms of George in England" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of George in England</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-george-scotland.svg" alt="The arms of George in Scotland" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of George in Scotland</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

To represent his new status and heritage, George I made significant
changes to the royal arms:

- First Quarter: The impaled arms of England and Scotland
- Second Quarter: The royal arms of France
- Third Quarter: The harp of Ireland
- Fourth Quarter: A representation of his German territories, combining
  the arms of Brunswick, Lüneburg, and Westphalia, surmounted by the
  Imperial Crown of the Holy Roman Empire to denote his position as
  Archtreasurer of the Empire

These additions acknowledged George I's German titles and territories,
reflecting the personal union between Great Britain and Hanover. The
inclusion of the Imperial Crown highlighted his roles within the Holy
Roman Empire.

This version of the royal arms remained in use, with minor
modifications, throughout the reigns of the Hanoverian monarchs until
1801.

## The Formation of the United Kingdom in 1801

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-george-iii-england.svg" alt="The arms of George III in England" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of George III in England</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-george-iii-scotland.svg" alt="The arms of George III in Scotland" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of George III in Scotland</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

The Acts of Union 1800 merged the Kingdom of Great Britain and the
Kingdom of Ireland to form the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, effective from January 1, 1801. This significant political
change prompted another redesign of the royal arms.

Key changes included:

- Removal of the French Arms: The royal arms of France were finally
  dropped, acknowledging the end of British claims to the French throne
  following the French Revolution and the establishment of the French
  Republic
- Reorganization of the Quarters:
  - First and Fourth Quarters: England's three lions passant guardant
  - Second Quarter: Scotland's lion rampant
  - Third Quarter: Ireland's harp
  - Fourth Quarter: The arms of the Electorate of Hanover, reflecting
    the monarch's German possessions

This new design symbolized a shift in focus toward the unity and
identity of the United Kingdom itself, rather than historical claims in
continental Europe. The royal arms now represented the constituent parts
of the United Kingdom and the monarch's personal territories.

### Queen Victoria and the Modern Arms

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-george-iii-with-hanover-england.svg" alt="The arms of George III in England with Kingdom of Hanover" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of George III in England with Kingdom of Hanover</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-george-iii-with-hanover-scotland.svg" alt="The arms of George III in Scotland with Kingdom of Hanover" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of George III in Scotland with Kingdom of Hanover</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

The Acts of Union 1800 united the Kingdom of Great Britain and the
Kingdom of Ireland, forming the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland. With this union, George III abandoned the historical claim to
the French throne, a decision that led to the removal of the
fleurs-de-lis from the royal arms. This revision symbolized a shift in
Britain's priorities toward unifying its own territories rather than
emphasizing historical claims in continental Europe. As a result, the
royal arms now prominently featured England, Scotland, Ireland, and
Hanover. To represent his status as Elector of Hanover, George III
included an inescutcheon surmounted by an electoral bonnet.

In 1816, Hanover was elevated to a kingdom, replacing the electoral
bonnet on the inescutcheon with a crown to reflect George III's new
status as King of Hanover. This crowned inescutcheon remained in the
royal arms until the death of William IV in 1837.

### Queen Victoria's Accession and Final Standardization

Queen Victoria's accession in 1837 marked a transformative moment for
the royal arms due to the end of the personal union between the United
Kingdom and Hanover. Because Salic law barred women from inheriting
Hanover's throne, Victoria's ascension effectively separated the British
and Hanoverian crowns. The inescutcheon bearing Hanoverian symbols was
removed from the royal arms, resulting in a design focused solely on the
United Kingdom's territories:

<div class="item col-md-6 px-4 pull-right">
  <div class="card">
    <figure>
      <div class="row mb-2">
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-victoria-england.svg" alt="The arms of Victoria in England" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Victoria in England</figcaption>
        </div>
        <div class="item col-md-6">
          <img class="featured-img mx-auto" src="/assets/img/2024/the-evolution-of-the-royal-arms/arms-victoria-scotland.svg" alt="The arms of Victoria in Scotland" />
            <figcaption class="images-caption">The arms of Victoria in Scotland</figcaption>
        </div>
      </div>
    </figure>
  </div>
</div>

 * First and Fourth Quarters: England's three lions passant guardant
 * Second Quarter: Scotland's lion rampant
 * Third Quarter: Ireland's harp

This configuration became the standard for British arms, centering on
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and was formally announced in The London
Gazette on July 26, 1837. It represented a cohesive national emblem that
would define the monarchy's heraldic identity into the modern era.  The
Monarchy's Focus on National Unity

Throughout Victoria's reign, the British Empire expanded to
unprecedented global influence, with territories and protectorates on
every continent. Despite Britain's imperial reach, the royal arms
maintained a focus on the British Isles, avoiding colonial symbols and
instead promoting a unified identity grounded in England, Scotland, and
Ireland. This decision reinforced the monarchy's role as a unifying
force within Britain, while imperial symbols and insignia were used
separately to convey authority across the empire.

With the end of the British Empire and the emergence of the Commonwealth
of Nations in the mid-20th century, the royal arms evolved to reflect
Britain's modern, post-colonial role. Free from direct references to
former colonies, the arms now symbolize unity within the Commonwealth
and a commitment to shared history and values rather than imperial
dominance.  Later Considerations for the Royal Arms

After Queen Victoria, subsequent monarchs considered, but ultimately
declined, further modifications to the royal arms. Upon his succession
in 1901, Edward VII briefly considered adding the Arms of Saxony as an
inescutcheon, reflecting his lineage, as well as a representation for
Wales. However, officials advised against these changes. During this
time, there were also calls for the inclusion of symbols to represent
the broader British Empire, though these proposals were ultimately set
aside. Notably, the Irish harp remained in the royal arms even after the
Partition of Ireland in 1921, emphasizing the continuity of the
historical symbols within the arms.

## The Modern Royal Arms and Its Symbolism

The royal arms have long functioned as symbols of unity and stability,
reflecting the values or reconciliations that marked a monarch's reign.
One of the most notable examples of this symbolic function is the
introduction of the Tudor Rose by Henry VII. Emerging from the aftermath
of the Wars of the Roses--a dynastic struggle between the House of
Lancaster and the House of York--the red-and-white Tudor Rose represented
the merging of these rival factions. By combining the red rose of
Lancaster with the white rose of York, Henry VII's emblem signified a
new era of peace and unity. This iconic image was more than decorative;
it reminded the people of the monarchy's role in healing divisions
within England and re-establishing its legitimacy after years of
internal strife.

Subsequent monarchs continued to use heraldic symbols to convey unity
and continuity. For instance, Queen Victoria's removal of Hanoverian
symbols from the royal arms following her accession in 1837 signaled a
shift from a European-focused lineage to a distinctly British identity.
As Victoria's reign saw the expansion of the British Empire, the royal
arms became a symbol of Britain's global reach and its enduring legacy,
even as the design focused on unity within the British Isles.

The British royal arms have evolved significantly over the centuries,
mirroring the complex journey of the monarchy itself. From the early
Plantagenet lions to the iconic Tudor Rose, each element introduced over
time tells a story of unity, ambition, and resilience. Heraldry served
as a powerful tool for asserting authority and forging connections
across England, Scotland, and Ireland, ultimately creating a visual
identity that still resonates today.

The modern royal arms, stripped of colonial symbolism yet rich in
historical significance, continue to symbolize the monarchy's dual
commitment to heritage and unity. They honor a legacy that has adapted
with the times, serving as both a reminder of Britain's past and a
representation of its enduring strength. In a rapidly changing world,
the royal arms stand as an emblem of continuity and a symbol of the
monarchy's role within Britain and the Commonwealth, reflecting both
tradition and the ability to adapt to new eras.

The royal arms are more than just an emblem--they encapsulate centuries
of English and British identity, evolving in tandem with the monarchy's
fortunes and ambitions.

