---
title: "Lessons on Invisible Authority and Expert Power from Alien Observers"
date: 2024-11-12
author: k3jph
layout: post
permalink: /2024/11/12/lessons-on-invisible-authority-and-expert-power-from-alien-observers
featured_image: /assets/img/2024/lessons-on-invisible-authority-and-expert-power-from-alien-observers.webp
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - organization theory
  - science fiction
  - project management
---

Imagine this: an alien captain named Kleck is stationed on a human space
fleet base, tasked with understanding human military ranks. He's pretty
confident he's got it figured out--after all, his species uses a
beautifully straightforward color-coded rank system. Purple is for
generals, blue is for captains, green for lieutenants, and so on. To
Captain Kleck, this system is as logical as it gets. But then he sees
something that makes his antennae twitch. A human doctor with no visible
insignia or rank walks onto the scene and starts ordering around
high-ranking officers. And they listen. 

This science fiction story about Kleck and "Doc" (Dr. Chen) offers a
surprisingly relatable look at real-world power structures. It's funny
and a little surreal, but it raises important questions: What is
authority based on? When does expertise outrank formal hierarchy? And
how do power dynamics shift in fast-paced, unpredictable situations?

In breaking down this story, we will explore a few central ideas from
organizational theory: formal vs. informal power, the concept of
situational authority, and how rank on paper doesn't always translate to
actual control. We'll also look at how expertise--especially in
life-and-death situations--can override traditional hierarchy, even if
it's invisible in the organizational chart. Buckle up, because it turns
out that Captain Kleck's bewilderment with human authority structures
has a lot to teach us.

{% include youtube.html id="4OsZ7wuId0I" %}

## The Alien View: Formal vs. Informal Power Structures

Power structures are as neat as a box of crayons for Captain Kleck and
his alien crew. In the Zexian military, rank isn't something you must
guess; it's color-coded. Generals wear purple, captains wear blue,
lieutenants get green, and the hierarchy goes down in a spectrum. Each
color not only tells you who's in charge but spells out what privileges
they have--no one questions it, and nothing's left to chance.

So, imagine Kleck's shock when he sees a human doctor--a "Doc"--stride up
to a decorated captain and demand the entire crew's attention. She's not
wearing any colors or insignia that Kleck can recognize, and she's
clearly not a part of the military chain of command. But the captain
listens. In fact, he immediately changes course and redirects his crew,
all because this "Doc" told him to.

For the Zexians, this is baffling. They live by a formal power
structure: clear, predictable, and universally recognized. In their
world, you don't give orders if you aren't in the chain of command. But
humans operate in a far more flexible way, where authority can shift
based on expertise or even the demands of the situation. Dr. Chen
doesn't have military rank, but her knowledge and role as a medical
expert give her a different kind of authority--the authority that comes
from knowing what to do in a crisis.

Here, we see two kinds of power at work: **formal power**, which is
based on a person's position in the hierarchy, and **informal power**,
which comes from knowledge, skill, or even personality. Formal
structures are easier to spot--like the Zexians' color-coded ranks--while
informal structures are often invisible but just as real. In a medical
emergency, Dr. Chen's informal authority takes precedence over formal
ranks because her expertise is what the situation demands. 

In human organizations, especially dynamic ones, these two types of
power can overlap, clash, or complement each other, depending on the
need. For Kleck, though, the idea that someone without a formal title
could outrank a decorated officer is as foreign as a purple general
would be to us. But as we'll see, this blending of formal and informal
authority is what makes complex organizations both adaptable and
resilient.

## French and Raven's Bases of Power

Understanding power dynamics isn't just about knowing who's "in charge."
Social psychologists [John French and Bertram
Raven](https://www.mindtools.com/abwzix3/french-and-ravens-five-forms-of-power)
described five main "bases" of power that shape authority in any
setting: **legitimate**, **reward**, **coercive**, **referent**, and
**expert** power. Each type plays a role in dynamic organizations, and
Dr. Chen's unexpected command over high-ranking military officers in the
story is a perfect case study.

{% include figure.html width="12" placement="center"
   image="/2024/lessons-on-invisible-authority-and-expert-power-from-alien-observers/french-and-ravens-bases-of-power.webp"
   alt="Mindmap diagram showing French and Raven's Bases of Power with
   five branches: Legitimate Power, Reward Power, Coercive Power,
   Referent Power, and Expert Power. Legitimate Power is based on formal
   roles, with the example of military authority. Reward Power relates
   to control over rewards, with examples like bonuses. Coercive Power
   involves enforcement or punishment, with an example of mandatory
   screenings. Referent Power is based on respect or admiration,
   exemplified by Dr. Chen’s respected role. Expert Power is based on
   specialized knowledge, represented by Dr. Chen’s medical expertise."
   cap="French and Raven's bases of power" %} 
   
### Legitimate Power

This is the most familiar kind of power--it's what we recognize in formal
titles and ranks. In the story, legitimate power is what Kleck expects
to see in action: generals and admirals hold authority because their
ranks are embedded in the structure of the military. To the Zexians,
legitimate power is non-negotiable, clearly defined, and universally
respected. When they see a high-ranking officer, they defer without
question.

But as the story shows, legitimate power is only one form of authority,
and it's not always the highest. For Dr. Chen, her lack of military rank
doesn't limit her ability to command when expertise is critical,
revealing the limits of legitimate power alone.

### Reward Power

Reward power stems from the ability to provide benefits or rewards,
encouraging others to follow directives. Although it's not as overt in
Dr. Chen's role, her ability to ensure others' health outcomes creates a
subtle form of reward power. For instance, officers who listen to her
can avoid medical issues and keep functioning optimally, which is a kind
of reward in a high-stakes environment.

In dynamic organizations, reward power often comes from leaders who
recognize and provide the resources people need to succeed--whether it's
extra support, mentorship, or even access to critical tools.

### Coercive Power

Coercive power, the "stick" to reward power's "carrot," is authority
based on the ability to administer consequences or punishments. Though
Dr. Chen doesn't wield punishment in a traditional sense, her control
over medical resources gives her a subtle coercive power. When a captain
hesitates to redirect power from weapons to life support, Dr. Chen warns
that failing to follow her orders could lead to "optional screening
procedures" in his next physical--an amusing but effective use of
coercive power.

Coercive power is common in traditional hierarchies, but when used
sparingly and thoughtfully, it can also reinforce the importance of
compliance in critical scenarios. In Dr. Chen's case, her coercive power
is less about punishment and more about emphasizing the need to
prioritize health and safety.

### Referent Power

Referent power is about personal influence--it's the respect and
admiration a person commands based on who they are, not just their rank
or role. Dr. Chen's demeanor and confidence lend her a natural authority
that compels others to follow her lead, even when it disrupts formal
hierarchy. Her reputation as a decisive, knowledgeable figure gives her
referent power, which Kleck notices when people instinctively defer to
her.

Referent power is critical in complex organizations because it inspires
loyalty and trust, creating a cooperative environment where people want
to follow strong leaders.

### Expert Power

Finally, expert power is authority grounded in knowledge and specialized
skills. This is the cornerstone of Dr. Chen's influence in the story.
When there's a medical crisis, her expertise in health and safety
protocols supersedes any military rank, and even the highest-ranking
officers defer to her. Her knowledge is what everyone relies on to
navigate high-stakes medical decisions, showcasing how expertise can
outrank formal titles in life-or-death situations.

### Blending the Bases of Power

Organizations today are increasingly complex, blending formal structures
with the need for flexibility and situational authority. Leaders often
rely on multiple bases of power to navigate changing circumstances
effectively. Dr. Chen's role in the story illustrates this blend--while
she doesn't have legitimate power in the military hierarchy, her expert,
referent, reward, and even coercive power allow her to exercise
authority when it matters most. This multi-layered approach to power
shows how authority in dynamic environments can shift depending on
knowledge, relationships, and the immediate needs of the situation.

## Rank in Position Versus Rank in Person

In most formal organizations, authority tends to come with a title. This
is "rank in position," where power is based on someone's official role
within a hierarchy. To the Zexians, Captain Kleck's species, this is the
only way authority works: a general outranks a captain, a captain
outranks a lieutenant, and the color of your uniform says it all. In
their world, titles mean everything, and they're not just symbols--they
dictate who gives orders and who follows.

But then there's Dr. Chen, who throws Kleck's understanding into
disarray. She holds no military title, and technically, she isn't in the
chain of command at all. Instead, her authority comes from her medical
expertise, which gives her "rank in person"--power that doesn't rely on a
formal title but on a person's knowledge or experience. When a health
crisis hits, it doesn't matter that she's not a military officer; Dr.
Chen becomes the de facto leader because her skills are exactly what the
situation demands.

{% include figure.html width="12" placement="center"
   image="/2024/lessons-on-invisible-authority-and-expert-power-from-alien-observers/rank-in-person-versus-rank-in-position.webp"
   alt="Venn diagram showing Rank in Position on the left, Rank in
   Person on the right, and Situational Authority as the overlap. Rank
   in Position attributes include formal titles and structured
   authority, while Rank in Person emphasizes expertise-based influence.
   Situational Authority combines both, allowing the most qualified
   person to lead based on situational needs."
   cap="Rank in position versus rank in person" %} 

This clash between "rank in position" and "rank in person" is a key
tension in many organizations, especially dynamic ones. Rank in position
works well in predictable situations, where tasks follow a clear
structure and each role has set responsibilities. But in high-stakes or
specialized scenarios, like a medical emergency, the strict hierarchy of
"rank in position" can slow down response times and leave critical
decisions in the hands of those who may not have the right expertise.
This is where **situational authority** comes in--authority that shifts
based on who is most qualified for the task at hand.

For Kleck, the idea of situational authority is hard to grasp. In his
mind, someone with no title should have no authority. But for humans,
this flexibility can mean the difference between success and failure.
When Dr. Chen steps in to give orders, she does so not because she
outranks the officers in the traditional sense but because her rank in
person--her medical expertise--puts her in the best position to make
life-saving decisions. Her authority is recognized by the officers, who
understand that in this situation, her expertise is more valuable than
any title.

In real-world organizations, blending rank in position with rank in
person can improve responsiveness and adaptability. A company may have a
CEO and a strict hierarchy, but when a cybersecurity threat hits, the
[chief information security officer
(CISO)](https://www.splunk.com/en_us/blog/learn/chief-information-security-officer-ciso-role.html)
often takes the lead, regardless of where they sit in the chain of
command. In the same way, hospitals defer to senior surgeons in
operating rooms, even though they may have less administrative authority
outside of that setting.  Organizations can prioritize expertise over
formal structure when needed by allowing situational authority.

Ultimately, Kleck's confusion highlights a real challenge in leadership:
balancing the need for stable, clear-cut roles with the flexibility to
let expertise take the reins. Organizations that recognize rank in
person alongside rank in position can respond faster to complex,
unexpected situations. For Dr. Chen, her authority isn't about
titles--it's about having the right knowledge at the right time, and the
confidence to step up when it matters.

## Situational Authority: Leadership When Stakes Change

Captain Kleck was just starting to understand human hierarchy, with its
ranks, titles, and respect for position, when Dr. Chen completely upends
his understanding. During a medical emergency, she overrides even the
highest-ranking officer's orders, and the general--a figure Kleck views
as unquestionable--steps back. To Kleck, this is unthinkable; in Zexian
culture, rank is absolute. Yet on the human base, Dr. Chen's knowledge
and quick judgment are what the moment demands, and even the general
knows that her expertise supersedes his title in this crisis.

{% include figure.html width="6" placement="right"
   image="/2024/lessons-on-invisible-authority-and-expert-power-from-alien-observers/situational-authority-flowchart.webp"
   alt="Flowchart for determining authority in different scenarios. The
   first decision point asks, 'Is this a standard procedure?' If yes, it
   follows the formal chain of command. If no, it asks, 'Does it require
   specialized expertise?' If yes, authority shifts to an expert. If no,
   it asks, 'Is the situation urgent?' If yes, authority is given to the
   most knowledgeable team member. If no, it returns to the formal chain
   of command." 
   cap="Flowchart illustrating how authority shifts" %} 
   
This concept, known as **situational authority**, allows the most
qualified individual to lead, regardless of where they sit in the
official chain of command. [Situational authority is common in fields
where rapid, high-stakes decisions are
required.](https://www.instagram.com/drebaldwin/reel/C86bB2JIAYu/) In
emergency response teams, for instance, the incident commander takes
control not based on rank but on having the most relevant expertise for
the situation--whether it's a medical emergency, a fire, or a hazardous
materials spill.  Similarly, in specialized projects, authority might
shift to a technical expert or project lead when their skills are
essential to the task at hand.

The benefit of situational authority is its responsiveness. The
traditional hierarchy can become a bottleneck in complex, dynamic
situations, slowing down decision-making as orders pass through multiple
layers. By allowing authority to shift to the person with the right
expertise, organizations can react quickly and effectively. Dr. Chen's
intervention in the story illustrates this perfectly. When time is of
the essence, she takes charge, saving precious minutes that would be
lost if she had to work through the formal chain of command. In this
case, the general steps back because he understands that her medical
expertise is more critical than his formal authority.

Situational authority isn't just about expertise; it's also about the
[trust and respect](https://boolkah.com/situational-leadership/) others
place in the individual taking the lead. Dr. Chen's authority is
accepted not because she demands it but because the others recognize her
knowledge and skill. This trust is essential for situational authority
to work. Without it, individuals in crisis might hesitate or
second-guess directives, undermining the swift action needed in
high-stakes scenarios. 

In dynamic organizations, situational authority provides a flexible
framework for responding to fast-changing environments. Tech companies
often embody this model in
"[scrum](https://www.scrum.org/resources/what-scrum-module)" or
"[agile](https://www.atlassian.com/agile)" project teams, where
leadership roles shift based on who has the relevant knowledge for each
sprint. Similarly, hospitals and trauma units rely on situational
authority, allowing senior medical staff to make calls that other
healthcare workers follow immediately, regardless of their place in the
hierarchy.

By adopting situational authority, organizations can cultivate
adaptability--a key asset in today's complex, unpredictable world.
Leaders who recognize when to hand control to those with specialized
knowledge empower their teams to make informed, effective decisions. Dr.
Chen's moment in the spotlight highlights this adaptive approach, where
those best equipped to handle the situation are allowed to lead,
ensuring the best possible outcome.

For Kleck, this kind of authority shift is profoundly alien, but it's a
way to increase human organizations' resilience and responsiveness. By
letting expertise guide action when stakes are high, dynamic
organizations can respond quickly to evolving challenges, balancing the
stability of formal structures with the adaptability of situational
leadership.

## Organizational Culture and Rituals

For Captain Kleck and his Zexian crew, the concept of authority is
wrapped up in visible ranks and formal orders. So, it's no wonder
they're utterly bewildered by the human rituals that seem to carry
invisible weight--like coffee breaks and casual interactions. To Kleck,
the fact that humans take their coffee so seriously is bizarre. But what
he misses is that these small rituals are part of a broader
organizational culture that binds people together, fostering informal
networks and reinforcing unspoken power dynamics.

Consider Dr. Chen's "Doc Authority." Beyond her formal medical
expertise, there's an unspoken respect for her role among the crew. This
respect isn't listed in any rulebook but is instead embedded in the
station's culture. Just as much as formal titles, these shared values
influence who has authority in various situations. By respecting "Doc
Authority," the crew accepts that Dr. Chen's guidance on health matters
is paramount, even over traditional military rank. This shared
understanding is part of the organization's culture, making her
influence felt even when her role isn't spelled out in the chain of
command.

Then there's the [coffee
ritual](https://lifeandthyme.com/drink/coffee-rituals-around-the-world/),
another source of mystery to Kleck. For the human crew, coffee breaks
aren't just a time to refuel--they're also moments for informal bonding.
Sharing a coffee is an opportunity to check in with colleagues, share
ideas, and, perhaps most importantly, cultivate relationships that
aren't defined by rank. Over time, these small, repeated interactions
build a foundation of trust and camaraderie that subtly shifts the
organization's power structure. Colleagues with strong informal
connections often have more influence, as their ideas and opinions are
shared and valued beyond official meetings or command structures.

In this way, organizational culture serves as the invisible scaffolding
that supports formal authority. Culture-based rituals create shared
understandings and unspoken norms that influence behavior, shape
priorities, and determine who holds power in specific situations. The
authority Dr. Chen commands, the camaraderie built over coffee, and even
the deference shown to experience over rank--all of these are expressions
of a deeper cultural fabric.

For Kleck, these rituals and informal hierarchies might seem irrational,
but in many organizations, they're the glue that holds everything
together. They build a common ground that transcends titles, allowing a
complex network of relationships, respect, and shared norms to thrive.
In the end, organizational culture isn't just a side effect of
authority--it's a powerful force that underpins it, guiding who holds
influence in ways that no official structure can capture.

## Network Dynamics: Authority Beyond Hierarchy

In many organizations, authority isn't just about titles or rank--it's
also about relationships. **Network theory** explores how informal
connections influence authority, allowing organizations to operate
outside the limits of a formal hierarchy. In a networked structure,
influence flows not just vertically (from higher rank to lower) but also
laterally, based on knowledge, trust, and communication. Informal
networks often enhance organizational flexibility, helping teams to
adapt to changing circumstances with speed and precision.

Dr. Chen's role in the story demonstrates a network-based approach to
authority. Even without a formal military rank, her influence extends
throughout the station because others recognize her expertise and trust
her judgment. When a health crisis strikes, the crew doesn't look up the
chain of command; they look to Dr. Chen. Her authority flows through a
web of informal relationships built on respect for her skills,
experience, and clear-headed decision-making. Rather than being limited
by her position, she wields influence that transcends official
structures.

These networked relationships can be a game-changer in dynamic
organizations, especially when quick decisions or specialized knowledge
are required. Tech companies, for instance, often rely on
cross-functional networks to tackle complex problems, with influence
moving according to expertise rather than rank. In healthcare, crisis
management often depends on tight-knit networks where doctors, nurses,
and administrators can bypass traditional hierarchies to deliver the
fastest and best care. These informal structures make organizations more
agile, as decisions can be made based on real-time needs instead of
waiting for approval through multiple layers of command.

The beauty of a networked approach is that it enhances decision-making
agility, encourages collaboration, and fosters resilience in complex
environments. By relying on networks of expertise and influence,
organizations can respond more effectively to new challenges and avoid
the bottlenecks that rigid hierarchies sometimes create. Dr. Chen's
authority, rooted in this network of respect and recognition, showcases
how informal power operates as a crucial support structure, especially
in critical moments.

In Captain Kleck's rigidly hierarchical world, position dictates
authority. But in the human station, influence flows through both formal
and informal channels, weaving a dynamic web that helps the organization
adapt, respond, and thrive. For Dr. Chen, this network-based authority
isn't an anomaly; it's a key component of effective leadership in
complex systems.

## Designing Effective Power Structures in Complex Organizations

Captain Kleck's experience on the human base may have been confusing,
but it offers clear insights for leaders navigating complex
organizations. As the story shows, effective power structures are more
than titles and formal chains of command. They require an appreciation
for expert power, situational authority, and the dynamic flow of
influence that transcends traditional hierarchy.

First, organizations benefit when they **acknowledge and support expert
power and situational authority**. Empowering those with the most
relevant expertise, like Dr. Chen in a medical crisis, can make all the
difference in critical situations. Leaders can foster this by actively
recognizing and encouraging expertise-based authority within their
teams, even when it operates outside the official structure.

Second, **organizational culture should value flexibility**. By
encouraging situational decision-making, leaders allow team members to
respond to challenges as they arise by fostering an environment where
situational decision-making is encouraged. Whether through shared
rituals, informal networks, or respect for specific roles like "Doc
Authority," creating a flexible culture strengthens an organization's
ability to adapt under pressure.

Balancing formal structures with network-based influence is another key
lesson. **Traditional hierarchy provides stability**, but informal
networks enhance adaptability. By weaving these together, leaders create
a framework that can handle both routine operations and unexpected
crises. For example, establishing cross-functional teams and supporting
collaboration across roles encourages knowledge-sharing and increases
organizational resilience.

Finally, organizations can establish **protocols that recognize informal
authority**, especially for critical situations. Formal recognition of
roles that operate outside typical hierarchies--for instance, assigning
incident commanders in emergencies or designating technical leads on
specialized projects--can help ensure that the right people are in charge
when it matters most.

These lessons highlight the value of adaptable power structures in
complex environments. For Captain Kleck, the blend of formal and
informal authority on the human base is baffling, but for dynamic
organizations, it's a necessity. By designing power structures that
respect both expertise and hierarchy, leaders can create a more
responsive, resilient organization capable of meeting the demands of an
unpredictable world.

## The Power of Expertise Over Titles

Captain Kleck's bewilderment at human authority dynamics may seem funny.
Still, it highlights a severe truth: in complex organizations, adequate
power often comes from a balance of formal rank and informal,
expertise-driven authority. Titles and chains of command have their
place, providing structure and stability. But as we see with Dr. Chen,
real authority sometimes rests with those who have the knowledge and
skill needed in the moment.

The story's humor lies in Kleck's struggle to understand this nuance,
yet his confusion mirrors a common organizational challenge.
Organizations can become more adaptable, responsive, and resilient by
recognizing different bases of power--like expert power and situational
authority. Understanding when to prioritize expertise over hierarchy
doesn't weaken an organization; it makes it stronger.

Reflecting on these dynamics, it's worth asking how our organizations
could benefit from informal authority and situational power. Are there
ways to encourage expertise-based leadership or build networks of
influence that operate beyond formal titles? By embracing rank and
expertise, organizations can harness the best of both worlds, creating a
power structure equipped to handle the complexities of today's
fast-paced environments.
