---
id: general-society-of-the-sons-of-the-revolution
title: General Society of the Sons of the Revolution
subtitle: Member _jure_ William Cornett (Virginia Line)
date: 2025-05-05
qualifying_ancestors: [ "William Cornett (Virginia Line)" ]
member_number: 
chapters:
  - name: Sons of the Revolution in the Commonwealth of Virginia
author: k3jph
layout: page
guid: general-society-of-the-sons-of-the-revolution
featured_image: /assets/img/ancestry/general-society-of-the-sons-of-the-revolution.webp
permalink: /ancestry/general-society-of-the-sons-of-the-revolution
redirect_from:
  - /ancestry/sr
  - /ancestry/gssr
---

The [Sons of the Revolution in the Commonwealth of
Virginia](https://srvirginia.org/) is a constituent society of a [national
hereditary organization](https://sr1776.org/) established in 1876, at the
centennial of American independence. Its founding purpose was to preserve the
memory of those who served in the cause of liberty during the Revolutionary War,
soldiers, sailors, and civil leaders whose commitment helped secure the creation
of the United States. The Society draws its membership from their lineal
descendants, offering a framework not only for genealogical recognition but also
for civic engagement rooted in historical continuity.

The Society is committed to fostering public understanding of the American
Revolution and its lasting impact. Through historical education, public
commemorations, scholarship, and the preservation of historic sites and
documents, it ensures that the sacrifices and ideals of the founding generation
remain part of our national consciousness. Its members support and participate
in ceremonies, research initiatives, and community programs that promote an
informed reverence for the past.

Beyond the historical mission, the Society cultivates among its members a sense
of inherited duty, an obligation to preserve the values of liberty,
self-governance, and national unity that were secured at great cost. In doing
so, it affirms the idea that remembrance is not passive: it is an active form of
citizenship. The Sons of the Revolution thus serves as a living bridge between
the struggles of the eighteenth century and the civic responsibilities of the
present day.

While similar in purpose, the Sons of the Revolution (SR) and the [Sons of the
American Revolution (SAR)](/ancestry/sar) are distinct organizations. The SR was
established first, founded in New York City by [John Austin
Stevens](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Austin_Stevens) as a centennial
commemoration of the Declaration of Independence. The SAR, founded in 1889,
emerged in part due to disagreements over membership eligibility, SR
traditionally limited eligibility to direct descendants of military and naval
officers and civil officials, while SAR allowed broader descent from
rank-and-file soldiers and others who contributed to the cause. Today, both
societies uphold the legacy of the American Revolution, but they differ in
traditions, scope of activities, and governing structure. Membership in the SR
often reflects an older, East Coast lineage culture and a closer affiliation
with the original 13 states.

## William Cornett

I was admitted to the Sons of the Revolution in the Commonwealth of Virginia
based on my descent from [William
Cornett](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Cornett-192), a Virginian by birth and a
Revolutionary War veteran whose postwar migration into Kentucky helped shape the
early history of the Appalachian frontier. His life, documented through military
records, pension applications, and local histories, offers a window into the
war's long reach and the sacrifices that built the early Republic.

### Early Life and Military Service

Born in April 1761 in Henrico County, Virginia, William Cornett was the son of
William and Lucy Cornett. In 1779, while residing in Buckingham County,
Virginia, he enlisted in the Revolutionary War, serving six months in [Captain
Anthony Winston](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthony_Winston)'s company under
Colonel Skipp. After his initial term, he re-enlisted in 1780 under Captain
Saunders, Major Garnaway, and Colonel Patterson, serving until shortly before
the [British surrender at
Yorktown](https://www.battlefields.org/learn/revolutionary-war/battles/yorktown)
in October 1781. His service was later recognized with a pension, granted on
August 12, 1833.

### Migration to Kentucky and Frontier Life

In 1796, William Cornett and his friend Gideon Ison embarked on a hunting
expedition from Virginia to Kentucky, seeking the abundant game reported in the
region. Despite concerns about Native American presence, they ventured into the
area and set up camp at the mouth of Beech Fork on Big Leatherwood in what is
now Perry County, Kentucky. The fertile land and plentiful game convinced them
of the area's potential for settlement.

William eventually settled at the mouth of Bull Creek in Perry County. His
contributions to the early development of the area were significant, and the
town of Cornettsville was named in his honor. His original log cabin and burial
site remain as historical landmarks in the community.

### Family and Descendants

William married [Rhoda Gilliam](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Gilliam-617) on
May 7, 1790, in Washington County, Virginia. They had several children,
including [Archibald](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Cornett-369), William
Jefferson, John, Elizabeth, and Lucy. After Rhoda's death in 1796, William
married Mary Ann Everage in April 1796 in Sullivan County, Tennessee. Mary had
two daughters from a previous relationship, Sarah "Sally" and Mary "Polly."
Together, William and Mary had additional children: Robert Bustard, Margaret
(who died in infancy), Roger, Rachel, Nancy, Nathaniel Woolery, and Joseph
Enoch.

William's descendants continued to play significant roles in the region's
development. His son Archibald, for instance, married [Judy
McDaniel](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/McDaniel-2288) and settled in Kentucky,
contributing to the community's growth. The Cornett family's legacy is evident
in the area's history and the numerous descendants who have continued to reside
in Kentucky and beyond.

### Legacy and Death

William Cornett passed away on November 26, 1836, in Perry County, Kentucky. He
is buried in the [Cornett Cemetery in
Cornettsville](https://sites.rootsweb.com/~kyperry3/Cornett_Cem_Cornettsville.html).
His life as a Revolutionary War patriot and pioneer settler left an indelible
mark on the region. The town of Cornettsville stands for his contributions, and
his story continues to inspire those who value the pioneering spirit and
dedication to community development.

*Additional memberships will be added as they are approved.*  
