---
id: order-of-descendants-of-the-ancient-and-honorable-artillery-company
title: Order of Descendants of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company
subtitle: Member _jure_ Robert Sanford (1661); member no. 235L
date: 2024-06-18
member_number: 235L
qualifying_ancestors: [ "Robert Sanford (1661)" ]
author: k3jph
layout: page
guid: order-of-descendants-of-the-ancient-and-honorable-artillery-company
featured_image: /assets/img/ancestry/order-of-descendants-of-the-ancient-and-honorable-artillery-company.webp
permalink: /ancestry/order-of-descendants-of-the-ancient-and-honorable-artillery-company
redirect_from: [ /ancestry/odahac, /ancestry/nehs/odahac ]
---

The [Order of Descendants of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery
Company](https://www.odhac.org/) (ODAHAC) is a lineage society for individuals
who descend from members of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company of
Massachusetts, the oldest chartered military organization in the Western
Hemisphere. Founded in 2002, the Order commemorates the lives and legacies of
those early citizen-soldiers who were integral to the colonial militias of
Massachusetts.

Membership is open to those who can prove descent from an ancestor who served in
the Company prior to 1800. The Order fosters historical research, preservation
of early military records, and public education about the colonial defense
system of New England. Its mission complements the goals of the original
Company, which continues to serve ceremonially in Massachusetts to this day.

## Robert Sanford

[Robert Sanford](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Sanford-1099) was born in
England, likely in the early 17th century, and immigrated to New England by the
mid-1600s. He married Elizabeth Skelton around 1652. By the 1670s, he had
settled in Swansea, Massachusetts, though earlier records place him in Boston,
where he was admitted to the Military Company of the Massachusetts, later known
as the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company, in the 1670s.

The Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company, chartered in 1638, served as a
training and organizing body for militia officers in the Massachusetts Bay
Colony. Membership was selective and usually limited to freemen and property
holders. Sanford's inclusion in the Company implies he was a man of standing,
trusted with responsibilities related to colonial defense.

Although detailed records of his service are limited, Robert Sanford's residence
in Swansea during King Philip's War (1675â€“1676) suggests he may have
participated in local defensive efforts during one of the most devastating
conflicts in colonial New England. Swansea was among the first towns attacked
during the war, and the defense of such frontier communities often relied on
local militia companies commanded by men with training from the Ancient and
Honorable Artillery Company.

Sanford lived beyond 1678, as shown in probate and land records from Swansea.
His daughter Sarah Sanford married Daniel Adams, beginning a line of descent
that would later include veterans of the American Revolution, pioneer settlers
of western New York, and nineteenth-century farmers in Indiana and Michigan.

## The Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company of Massachusetts

The [Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company of
Massachusetts](https://www.ahac.us.com/), founded in 1638, is the oldest
chartered military organization in continuous service in the Western Hemisphere.
Modeled on the [Honourable Artillery Company of London](https://hac.org.uk/),
its original purpose was to train the officer corps of the Massachusetts militia
and to ensure the colony's defensive preparedness during an era of uncertainty
and frontier conflict.

Throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, membership in the Company was both a
civic duty and an honor, often extended to
[freemen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freeman_%28Thirteen_Colonies%29),
landowners, and men of established character. The AHAC conducted regular drills
and musters on Boston Common, maintained readiness among colonial militia
leaders, and served as a social and professional network for Massachusetts's
military elite.

Though never a combat unit itself, the Company was integral to the military
infrastructure of colonial Massachusetts. Many of its members went on to hold
commissions in local militias during [King Philip's
War](https://www.americanhistorycentral.com/entries/king-philips-war-1675/), the
[French and Indian
Wars](https://www.battlefields.org/learn/articles/french-and-indian-war-1754-1763-causes-and-outbreak),
and the American Revolution.

Today, the AHAC continues its mission in a ceremonial and educational capacity.
Headquartered at [Faneuil Hall](https://faneuilhallmarketplace.com/) in Boston,
the Company preserves its historic armory, maintains a museum, and participates
in patriotic events and memorial observances. Its membership includes veterans,
public servants, and citizens committed to the legacy of service that has
defined the organization for nearly four centuries.

Membership in the Order of Descendants of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery
Company recognizes those whose ancestors once stood among these early defenders,
citizen-soldiers who shaped the course of American history through service and
leadership in times of trial.

*Additional memberships will be added as they are approved.*

{% include figure.html width="12"
   image="ancestry/ODAHAC-Sanford.webp" border=true
   alt="Membership certificate in the Order of Descendants of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company"
   cap="Membership certificate in the Order of Descendants of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company" %}
   
Or you can [download the PDF here](/assets/docs/ancestry/ODAHAC-Sanford.pdf).
