---
id: order-of-founders-and-patriots-of-america
title: Order of Founders and Patriots of America
subtitle: Member _jure_ Henry Adams (Founder) via Daniel Adams (Patriot); member no. 6570, DC no. 413
date: 2025-08-13
qualifying_ancestors: [ "Henry Adams (Founder) via Daniel Adams (Patriot)" ]
member_number: 6570
chapters:
  - name: District of Columbia Chapter
    member_number: 413
author: k3jph
layout: page
guid: order-of-founders-and-patriots-of-america
featured_image: /assets/img/ancestry/order-of-founders-and-patriots-of-america.webp
permalink: /ancestry/order-of-founders-and-patriots-of-america
redirect_from:
  - /ancestry/ofpa
  - /ancestry/order-of-founders-and-patriots-of-america
---

The [Order of Founders and Patriots of America](https://ofpa.org/) is a
hereditary society honoring descendants of individuals who settled in the
American colonies before 13 May 1657 (Founders) and whose direct male-line
descendants served as patriots during the American Revolution. Conceived over
the course of half a dozen meetings in early 1896 by prominent men assembled in
Manhattan, the Order was designed to be a unique and distinctive organization
that, in the words of its first expositor, "stands as preeminently American."
Membership requires documented proof of both a qualifying Founder and a
qualifying Patriot in the same male line, a standard that makes it one of the
most selective lineage societies devoted to early American heritage.

## Founder: Henry Adams

[Henry Adams](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Adams-277) (c. 1583–1646) was the
immigrant progenitor of the Adams family of Massachusetts. Born in Barton St.
David, Somersetshire, England, he was part of the Great Migration to New
England, arriving in the Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1638 with several of his
children. He settled at Mount Wollaston, later incorporated as Braintree and now
part of Quincy, where he received a grant of forty acres and established a
homestead.

Adams became an integral member of the new settlement, and his children went on
to found or help establish towns such as Medfield, Marlborough, and Chelmsford.
His descendants would become one of the most distinguished political families in
United States history, including President John Adams, President John Quincy
Adams, and President Calvin Coolidge. Many others in the family served as
legislators, jurists, and local leaders, continuing the civic tradition begun by
Henry’s generation.

Henry Adams died in Braintree in 1646. While the exact location of his grave is
unknown, his memory is preserved in a granite monument erected in 1827 by
President John Quincy Adams in Quincy Center. The inscription famously calls him
"the Ancestor of Presidents" and claims he "took his flight from the Dragon
persecution in Devonshire, England, and alighted with eight sons near Mount
Wollaston." Although some historians view parts of this inscription as symbolic
rather than literal, the monument underscores the enduring national significance
of his legacy.

## Patriot: Daniel Adams

[Daniel Adams](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Adams-11888) (20 April 1750 – 19
December 1832) was a Massachusetts farmer, deacon, and Revolutionary War soldier
whose service connects the founding generation of New England to the cause of
American independence. Born in Medway, Suffolk County (now Norfolk County), to
Thomas Adams and Mary Partridge Adams, he was a direct male-line descendant of
Henry Adams of Braintree.

Daniel married Martha Watkins in Holliston on 30 January 1772. At the outbreak
of the Revolution, he was living in Worcester County and served in the militia
during the Lexington Alarm of 19 April 1775. This "alarm" was the rapid
mobilization of colonial militia following the first shots at [Lexington and
Concord](https://www.battlefields.org/learn/revolutionary-war/battles/lexington-and-concord).
Riders spread the news across Massachusetts, summoning citizen-soldiers from
dozens of towns to march toward the fighting. Daniel served as a private in
Captain Edmund Brigham’s company under the overall command of [Major General
Artemas Ward](https://wardhouse.harvard.edu/general-ward), who coordinated
militia movements in central Massachusetts. While surviving records do not
confirm whether his company reached Lexington Green itself, his participation
places him among those who responded immediately to the opening call of the
Revolutionary War.

Daniel’s subsequent service included enlistments from Barre and Rutland,
Massachusetts. On 21 August 1777, he joined Captain Benjamin Ayers’s company in
Colonel Nathan Sparhawk’s regiment for a ten-day tour, and on 26 September 1777
he marched toward Bennington in the Northern Department for twenty-nine days.
These deployments reflect the nature of militia service, short, urgent tours in
response to strategic needs, often balancing military duty with ongoing
agricultural work at home.

After Martha’s death around 1790, Daniel married Sarah Alden of Barre in 1791.
Following her death about 1808, he married Elizabeth Parmenter of Oakham
in 1809. By this time, he was living in Rutland, where he became a deacon in the
local church and a respected community leader. His will, dated 26 January 1826
and proved in 1833, named his wife Elizabeth; sons Jesse, Moses, Aaron, Daniel,
Abijah, and Jonas; daughter Polly Mary; and two granddaughters.

Daniel Adams died in Rutland on 19 December 1832 at the age of 82 and was buried
in Goose Hill Cemetery. His life bridged the colonial and early national eras,
embodying the Massachusetts tradition of local leadership, military readiness,
and civic duty stretching back to the Puritan founders.

## Membership
Through direct descent from Founder Henry Adams and Patriot Daniel Adams, my
admission to the Order affirms a continuous family legacy spanning from the
earliest years of colonial settlement to the fight for American independence. In
my line, the Adams name endured unbroken for nearly three centuries, concluding
on 1 February 1910 with the death of [John Hess Adams](/ancestry/depm). The
application process, supported by careful documentary research, reflects the
Order’s dedication to preserving and honoring the nation’s formative history.

_Additional memberships will be added as they are approved._
