---
id: order-of-descendants-of-colonial-physicians-and-chirurgiens
title: Order of Descendants of Colonial Physicians and Chirurgiens
subtitle: Member _jure_ Israel Taylor (1660–1725)
date: 2025-01-09
founding_date: 2022-03-24
qualifying_ancestors: [ "Israel Taylor (1660–1725)" ]
author: k3jph
layout: page
guid: order-of-descendants-of-colonial-physicians-and-chirurgiens
featured_image: /assets/img/ancestry/order-of-descendants-of-colonial-physicians-and-chirurgiens-1607-1783.webp
permalink: /ancestry/order-of-descendants-of-colonial-physicians-and-chirurgiens
redirect_from: [ "/ancestry/odcpc" ]
---

The [Order of Descendants of Colonial Physicians and Chirurgiens
1607–1783](https://ordercolonialpandc.weebly.com/) honors those descended from
medical professionals who served in the American colonies during the period from
Jamestown’s founding through the end of the Revolutionary War. These early
physicians, surgeons, barber-surgeons, and apothecaries served vital roles in a
world that was often harsh, unsanitary, and medically underprepared. Their
descendants work to preserve this legacy through historical awareness,
genealogical research, and commemoration.

## Israel Taylor: Quaker Surgeon of Tinicum Island

[Israel Taylor](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Taylor-32361) (1660–1725) was born
in Knaresborough, Yorkshire, England, and immigrated to Pennsylvania in 1682
with his father, Christopher Taylor, as part of William Penn's Quaker fleet.
Within a few short years, he had established himself on [Tinicum
Island](https://explorepahistory.com/hmarker.php?markerId=1-A-2B), known in his
will as *Mattinicuck Island*, where he practiced as a *chirurgeon* (surgeon) and
landholder.

Taylor was not only a medical practitioner but also a statesman and civic
leader. He served in the Pennsylvania Assembly representing Chester County
across six terms between 1710 and 1722. In a 1709 communication, Deputy Governor
Charles Gookin referenced "Israel Taylor, whose daughter had like to have been
stolen by color of a license," showing both his prominence and the peculiarities
of colonial law and life.

His will, dated 17 November 1725 and proved in 1726, identified him as
"chirurgeon" and outlined a considerable estate, including the entirety of
Tinicum Island and large tracts in what is now Chester and Strasburg Townships.
He directed that he be buried in his orchard beside his wife and children,
reflecting both Quaker simplicity and familial devotion.

### A Medical Legacy in Colonial America

Though little is known of his formal training, Israel Taylor's identification as
a surgeon—especially in legal documents and his own will—underscores the trust
placed in his skills by both neighbors and government. Colonial surgeons often
served their communities broadly, from battlefield surgery to midwifery, from
trauma care to the treatment of disease. Taylor's medical legacy lives on in his
descendants and in the community he helped shape.

## What Is a Chirurgeon?

In his 1725 will, Israel Taylor referred to himself as a chirurgeon—a title with
deep roots in early medical practice. The term chirurgeon is an archaic form of
the word surgeon, deriving from the Greek _cheirourgos_, meaning "hand-worker."
Though the spelling is obsolete today, it was commonly used in the 17th and
early 18th centuries, especially in British and colonial contexts.

While the modern term surgeon has come to represent a highly specialized and
institutionally credentialed medical expert, a chirurgeon in Taylor's time was a
much more practical and accessible figure. Chirurgeons were trained, often
through apprenticeship rather than formal education, to treat wounds, perform
amputations, set broken bones, lance abscesses, and provide other forms of
physical medical care. They worked primarily with their hands, and were
considered craftsmen as much as medical practitioners.

This role stood in contrast to that of the physician, who typically received a
university education and focused on internal medicine, diagnosis, and
prescribing regimens based on Galenic or humoral theories. Physicians were rare
in colonial America. Chirurgeons, by contrast, were more common, particularly in
rural or frontier areas, where practical care was in greater demand than
classical training.

That Taylor identified himself not as a physician but as a chirurgeon reflects
both his Quaker humility and his practical reputation. He was not merely versed
in theory but was known for doing, for serving his community through the direct,
often uncomfortable work of colonial medicine. His role would have been
indispensable in a time and place where access to medical care was sparse and
physical injury was a daily reality.

## Honoring a Colonial Healer

Membership in the Order of Descendants of Colonial Physicians and Chirurgiens
1607–1783 recognizes not only the genealogical connection to Israel Taylor but
the historical importance of his life and work. As a Quaker, a landholder, a
father, a public servant, and a surgeon, Israel embodied the diverse
responsibilities placed upon colonial physicians. His story stands as a reminder
of the humanity and resolve that shaped early America.
