---
id: society-of-the-descendants-of-the-colonial-clergy
title: Society of the Descendants of the Colonial Clergy
subtitle: Member _jure_ Rev. Alexander Underwood (1688-1767); member no. 3241
date: 2025-01-28
founding_date: 1933-12-31
member_number: 3241
qualifying_ancestors: [ "Rev. Alexander Underwood (1688-1767)" ]
author: k3jph
layout: page
guid: society-of-the-descendants-of-the-colonial-clergy
featured_image: /assets/img/ancestry/society-of-the-descendants-of-the-colonial-clergy.webp
permalink: /ancestry/society-of-the-descendants-of-the-colonial-clergy
redirect_from: [ /ancestry/sdcc ]
---

The [Society of the Descendants of the Colonial
Clergy](https://www.colonialclergy.com/) is a hereditary organization
dedicated to honoring and preserving the legacy of the ministers and
religious leaders who played a pivotal role in colonial American
society. Founded in 1933, the Society fosters research into early
American religious history and provides a network for descendants of
colonial clergy.

## Rev. Alexander Underwood

[Rev. Alexander Underwood](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Underwood-185)
(1688-1767) was a prominent Quaker minister and a dedicated spiritual
leader who played a significant role in shaping the early Quaker
community in Pennsylvania. His deep commitment to faith and religious
service was evident in his extensive travels, leadership roles, and
active participation in the expansion of Quakerism.

### Early Life and Ministry

Born in Baltimore, Maryland, to [Samuel
Underwood](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Underwood-189) and [Mary
Wilcocks](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Wilcocks-24), Alexander
Underwood grew up in an era of intense religious and social
transformation. The early 18th century saw a flourishing of
[Quakerism](/ancestry/nsdeq), particularly in the American colonies,
where its principles of pacifism, egalitarianism, and spiritual
introspection gained traction among settlers seeking religious freedom.
Underwood's family, deeply immersed in this movement, provided an
environment that nurtured his unwavering faith and sense of purpose.

In 1710, Underwood married Jane Harris in [New Castle,
Delaware](https://www.newcastlehistory.org/). Their union was one of
both spiritual and familial significance, as their children would go on
to become key figures in the expansion of Quaker ideals across
Pennsylvania and beyond. His role as a husband and father was deeply
intertwined with his religious commitments, ensuring that his household
was one of faith, discipline, and devotion to Quaker principles.

By 1722, Alexander had established himself in [London Grove Township,
Chester County, Pennsylvania](https://chesco.org/), a region that had
become a hub for Quaker settlers. His natural leadership and strong
moral character quickly made him an integral part of the local [Friends
Meeting](https://www.fgcquaker.org/). His dedication was formally
recognized on November 31, 1735, when he was appointed as an Elder, an
esteemed position that carried significant responsibility. In this role,
he was entrusted with overseeing the spiritual development of the
congregation, maintaining adherence to Quaker testimonies, and serving
as a mediator in disputes, ensuring that community life aligned with
Quaker ethics.

Underwood's ministry extended far beyond the boundaries of Pennsylvania.
He embarked on at least two extensive missionary journeys to North
Carolina, traversing difficult terrain to visit and support Friends
Meetings throughout the region. His presence provided much-needed
guidance to fledgling Quaker communities, reinforcing their commitment
to pacifism, integrity, and mutual aid. These travels were not without
hardship, as long journeys on horseback and exposure to the elements
tested his endurance. Nevertheless, his perseverance helped cement the
Quaker presence in North Carolina, ensuring that the faith continued to
spread and thrive.

Beyond his spiritual duties, Underwood also played a pivotal role in the
practical aspects of community-building. He facilitated the
establishment of meetinghouses, encouraged literacy and education among
fellow Quakers, and worked tirelessly to maintain peaceful relations
with neighboring communities. His ability to bridge theological
conviction with practical leadership solidified his reputation as one of
the most respected Quaker ministers of his time.

His influence, both in Pennsylvania and North Carolina, was instrumental
in shaping the early American Quaker movement. He left behind not only a
strong family legacy but also a spiritual one that would endure for
generations, ensuring that the Quaker values of simplicity, truth, and
peace remained central to the communities he served.

### Later Years and Legacy

In 1742, Rev. Underwood relocated to [Warrington, York County,
Pennsylvania](https://www.yorkhistorycenter.org/), where he continued to
serve as a spiritual mentor and community leader. His influence extended
beyond the walls of the meetinghouse, as he actively participated in
land transactions, community disputes, and governance within the Quaker
society. His deep commitment to the faith was unwavering, even after the
passing of his first wife,
[Jane](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Harris-4461). In 1748, he remarried
[Sarah Bowater Beals](https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Bowater-12), a
Quaker widow with her own extensive family ties to the movement.
Together, they worked tirelessly to strengthen the spiritual and
communal bonds of the Friends Meetings, ensuring the continued growth
and integrity of the Quaker faith in the region.

Rev. Underwood's later years were marked by sustained religious devotion
and an ever-expanding family network. As an Elder, he played a key role
in overseeing the discipline of the congregation, settling theological
matters, and maintaining the [Quaker testimonies of peace and
integrity](https://www.quaker.org/). He also frequently hosted visiting
ministers and played an instrumental role in fostering ties between
Quaker communities in Pennsylvania and beyond. He passed away on October
31, 1767, leaving behind a profound legacy of faith, service, and
leadership. His will, dated May 28, 1767, meticulously provided for his
children--John, Elihu, William, Samuel, Thomas, Joseph, and Benjamin--as
well as his daughters Ruth Morthland, Mary Wells, Ann Fraizor, and Jane
Smith. His burial at the [Warrington Friends Meeting House
Cemetery](https://www.findagrave.com/cemetery/2313888/) remains a
lasting testament to his unwavering dedication to Quaker principles.

His legacy was formally acknowledged on May 7, 1768, when the Quaker
community approved an official eulogy recognizing his lifelong
commitment to ministry. This eulogy highlighted his leadership,
missionary efforts, and the indispensable role he played in sustaining
the Quaker movement during a time of expansion and change. To this day,
his contributions to Quakerism in Pennsylvania and North Carolina
continue to be studied and honored by historians and genealogists. His
life serves as an enduring example of spiritual fortitude, dedication to
community, and steadfast adherence to the principles of the Religious
Society of Friends.

## Membership in the Society

Through my descent from Rev. Alexander Underwood, I am honored to be a
member of the Society of the Descendants of the Colonial Clergy,
recognizing his legacy in shaping early American religious life. The
Society remains committed to preserving the history of colonial
ministers and their vital role in establishing the spiritual and
cultural foundations of the American colonies.

*Additional memberships will be added as they are approved.*

{% include figure.html width="12"
   image="/ancestry/SDCC-Underwood.webp" border=true
   alt="Membership certificate in the Society of the Descendants of the Colonial Clergy"
   cap="Membership certificate in the Society of the Descendants of the Colonial Clergy" %}
   
Or you can [download the PDF here](/assets/docs/ancestry/SDCC-Underwood.pdf).
